Personalized News Video Recommendation
Hangzai Luo1, Jianping Fan1, Daniel A. Keim2, and Shin’ichi Satoh3
1 CS Department, UNC-Charlotte, USA, hluo, jfan@uncc.edu
2 University of Konstanz, keim@uni-konstanz.de
3 NII, Tokyo, Japan, satoh@nii.ac.jp
Abstract. In this paper, a novel framework is developed to support personalized
news video recommendation. First, multi-modal information sources for news
videos are seamlessly integrated and synchronized to achieve more reliable news
topic detection, and the contexts between different news topics are extracted au-
tomatically. Second, topic network and hyperbolic visualization are seamlessly
integrated to support interactive navigation and exploration of large-scale collec-
tions of news videos at the topic level, so that users can gain deep insights of
large-scale collections of news videos at the first glance. In such interactive topic
network navigation and exploration process, users’ personal background knowl-
edge can be exploited for selecting news topics of interest interactively, building
up their mental models of news needs precisely and formulating their queries eas-
ily by selecting the visible news topics on the topic network directly. Our system
can further recommend the relevant web news, the new search directions, and the
most relevant news videos according to their importance and representativeness
scores. Our experiments on large-scale collections of news videos have provided
very positive results.
Key words: Topic network, personalized news video recommendation.
1 Introduction
There are more than 30,000 television stations in the world, these television stations
broadcast large amounts of TV news programs (news videos) every day. Due to the
large number of broadcast channels and TV news programs, finding news videos of
interest is not a trivial task: (a) Most existing content-based video retrieval (CBVR)
systems assume that users can formulate their information needs precisely either in
terms of keywords or example videos. Unfortunately, users may not be able to know
what is happening now (i.e., if they know it, it is not a news), thus it is very hard for
them to find the suitable keywords or example videos to formulate their news needs
precisely without obtaining sufficient knowledge of the available news topics of inter-
est. Thus there is an urgent need to develop new techniques for detecting news topics
of interest from large-scale collections of news videos to assist users on finding news
videos of interest more effectively. (b) Because the same news topic can be discussed
in many TV channels and news programs, topic-based news search may return large
amount of news videos and thus simple news search via topics may bring the serious
problem of information overload to the users. (c) Most existing CBVR systems treat all
2 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
users equally while completely ignoring the diversity and rapid change of their search
interests. Besides the rapid growth of broadcast TV channels and news programs, we
have also observed different scenarios of news needs from different users, thus it is very
difficult to come up with a one size fits all approach for accessing large-scale collections
of news videos. (d) The keywords for news topic interpretation may not be expressive
enough for describing the rich details of video contents precisely and using only the
keywords may not be able to capture users’ search intentions effectively. Thus visual-
ization is becoming a critical component of personalized news video recommendation
system [3-8]. (e) The objectives for personalized video recommendation and content-
based video retrieval are very different, which make it unsuitable to directly apply the
existing CBVR techniques for supporting personalized video recommendation. Thus
supporting personalized news video recommendation is becoming one important fea-
ture of news services [1].
In this paper, we have developed a novel framework to support personalized news
video recommendation, and our framework is significantly different from other existing
works: (a) Rather than performing semantic video classification and automatic video
content understanding on the single-modal channel of news videos, we have seam-
lessly integrated multi-modal information channels (audio, video and closed captions)
to achieve more reliable news topic detection. (b) The associations among the news top-
ics (i.e., inter-topic contexts) are determined automatically and an interestingness score
is automatically assigned to each news topic via statistical analysis. Such interesting-
ness scores are further used to select the news topics of interest and filter out the less
interesting news topics automatically. (c) A hyperbolic visualization tool is incorporated
to enable interactive topic network exploration and allow users to gain deep insights of
large-scale collections of news topics at the first glance, so that they can make better
search decisions and find the news topics of interest interactively according to their
personal preferences. The user’s personal knowledge, search intentions and contexts,
which are disclosed and captured in the interactive topic network navigation and explo-
ration process, can be taken into consideration for personalizing the topic network and
the search results. (d) A novel video ranking algorithm is developed for recommending
the relevant web news, the new search directions and the most relevant news videos
according to their importance and representativeness scores for a given news topic.
2 Related Work
The Informedia Digital Video Library project at CMU has achieved significant pro-
gresses on analyzing, indexing and searching of large-scale collections of news videos
[11-12], and several applications have been reported, such as semantic video under-
standing, multi-modal decision fusion, keyword-based video retrieval and query result
visualization. Unfortunately, automatic video understanding is still an open problem for
computer vision [7-8].
Visualization is widely used to help the users explore large amount of data collec-
tions and find interesting parts interactively [3-8]. In-spire [3] has been developed for
visualizing and exploring large-scale text document collections, where statistics of news
reports is put on a world map to inform the audiences of the “hotness” of regions and
the relations among the regions. One major problem for such geographical location-
Personalized News Video Recommendation 3
based visualization approach is that some hot regions (such as middle-east) may be too
busy but other places may be empty. TimeMine [4] is proposed to detect the most im-
portant reports and organize them through the timeline with the statistical models of
the word usage. Another system, called newsmap [5], can organize news topics from
Google news on a rectangle, where each news story covers a visualization space that is
proportional to the number of related news pages reported by Google. News titles are
drawn in the visualization space allocated to the relevant news topic.
It is very attractive to visualize the news topics according to their importance scores,
but another aspect of news topics (i.e., inter-topic contexts) are missed by all these ex-
isting techniques (e.g., this could be a serious problem for all these existing techniques
because the news topics of inetrest may never happen individually). Context between
the news topics is also very important for users to make better search decisions, espe-
cially when the users are not familiar with the available news topics and their search
goals or ideas are still fuzzy. The inter-topic context can give a good approximation
of the interestingness of the news topics (i.e., like PageRank for characterizing the
importance of web pages). Thus it is very attractive to integrate topic network (i.e.,
news topics and their inter-topic contexts) for characterizing the interestingness of the
news topics, assisting users on making better search decisions and suggesting the future
search directions.
ThemeRiver [6] can visualize large-scale collections of news documents with the
keywords or the themes. ThemeRiver can intuitively represent the distribution structure
of the themes and the keywords in the collections. Such distribution structures of the
themes and the keywords may be useful for disclosing statistical knowledge of large-
scale collections of news documents, but they may not make any sense to the users
according to their goals of news search because there is an interest gap between the
distribution structures and the users’ real news needs (e.g., news analysts may care such
statistical knowledge, but general users as the news seekers may just care the news
topics of interest and their inter-topic contexts).
When large-scale news collections come into view, the number of the available news
topics could be very large and displaying all of them to the users may mislead them. To
visualize the news topics of interest in a size-limited screen, most existing algorithms
have to select the most significant news topics of interest according to their definitions
of importance. Unfortunately, the importance score of a news topic may depend on two
issues: (a) the relative importance of the given news topic in the pool of large-scale news
video collections; (b) the personal preferences for each particular user which may not
be known at the beginning. Thus selecting and disclosing only the most important news
topics of interest according to the pre-defined criteria may hinder users to access some
news topics, which are strongly related with their personal preferences but may not
be significant in the large-scale news video collections. For example, the news topics
for NBA playoff may be very interesting for basketball fans, but the news topics for
president candidate ellection may always dominate the pool of news topics and have
higher interestingness scores in general. Thus there is an urgent need to develop new
algorithms which are able to take the user’s personal preferences into consideration for
defining the personalized interestingness scores of the news topics.
4 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
There are two well-accepted approaches for supporting personalized information
retrieval [9-10]: content-based filtering and collaborative filtering. Unfortunately, all
these existing personalized information recommendation techniques largely depend on
the collections of users’ profiles and the available text context descriptions, thus they
cannot support new users effectively because their profiles may not be available. Be-
cause of the shortage of the available text descriptions of news videos, all these existing
techniques cannot directly be extended for enabling personalized news video recom-
mendation and there is an urgent need to develop news frameworks.
3 Personalized News Topic Recommendation
In this paper, an interactive approach is developed by incorporating topic network and
hyperbolic visualization to recommend the news topics of interest for assisting users
on accessing large-scale collections of news videos more effectively. To do this, an au-
tomatic scheme is first developed to construct the topic network for representing and
interpreting large-scale collections of news videos at the topic level. In addition, a hy-
perbolic visualization technique is integrated to enable interactive navigation and explo-
ration of large-scale topic network and recommend the news topics of interest according
to the users’ personal preferences.
Fig. 1. The flowchart for synchronizing multiple sources for news topic detection.
Topic detection is important because many people often want to identify some spe-
cific news stories or topics that are relevant to their personal interests. For the TV news
programs, there are three multi-modal information channels (audio, video and closed
captions) that can be integrated and be synchronized to enable more reliable news topic
detection. Because the inherent property of speech is purely semantic, lexical search
from automatic speech recognition (ASR) transcripts has been treated as the most suc-
cessful strategy for content-based video retrieval. The problem with the ASR transcripts
is that the spoken words may not completely cover the abundant semantic contents
available in the news video.
As shown in Fig. 1, we have developed a new scheme for automatic news topic
detection by taking the advantage of multi-modal information channels (cross-media).
First, automatic speech recognition (ASR), natural language processing (NLP), and se-
mantic video classification are performed parallelly on these three multi-modal infor-
mation channels to determime the keywords for news topic description from both the
Personalized News Video Recommendation 5
audio channel and the closed captions and detect the video concepts from the video
channel. Second, the audio channel is synchronized with the closed captions, and the
video channel is further synchronized with the audio channel and the closed captions.
Finally, the news topic detection results from these three multi-modal information chan-
nels are integrated to boost the performance of our news topic detection algorithm. Af-
ter the closed captions are synchronized with the news videos, we can assign the video
shots to the most relevant news topics that are accurately detected from the closed cap-
tions. Thus all the video shots, which locate between the start time and the end time of
a given new topic (that has been detected from the closed captions), are assigned to the
given news topic automatically. Integrating multi-modal information channels for news
topic detection can significantly enhance the detection accuracy.
The inter-topic contextual relationships are obtained automatically, where both the
cosine similarity and the mutual similarity for the relevant news topics are used to define
a new measurement for determining their inter-topic associations more precisely. The
inter-topic context ? (Ci, Cj) between two news topics Cj and Ci is determined by:
? (Ci, Cj) = ? · ?(Ci, Cj) + ? · ?(Ci, Cj), ?+ ? = 1 (1)
where the first part?(Ci, Cj) denotes the cosine similarity between the term weights for
the text terms to interpret the news topicsCj andCi, the second part ?(Ci, Cj) indicates
the mutual similarity between the text terms for interpreting the news topics Cj and Ci
according to their co-occurrence probability, ? and ? are their relative importances.
Fig. 2. Our large-scale topic network for organizing large-scale news videos.
The cosine similarity ?(Ci, Cj) between the text terms for interpreting the news
topics Cj and Ci can be defined as:
?(Ci, Cj) =
?N
l=1 wl(Ci) · wl(Cj)??N
l=1 wl(Ci)
2
??N
l=1 wl(Cj)
2
(2)
where N is the number of news documents (closed caption documents) in our collec-
tions, wl(Ci) and wl(Cj) are the weights for the text terms for interpreting the news
6 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
topics Cj and Ci.
??
?
wl(Ci) = log(fl(Ci) + 1.0) · log
N+1
fl+0.5
wl(Cj) = log(fl(Cj) + 1.0) · log
N+1
fl+0.5
(3)
where fl(Ci) and fl(Cj) are the frequencies of the text terms for interpreting the news
topics Cj and Ci in the lth news document (closed caption document), fl is the fre-
quency of the lth news document which the news topics Cj and Ci occur in. The higher
value of the cosine similarity ?(Ci, Cj) implies the stronger association ? (Ci, Cj) be-
tween the relevant news topics Cj and Ci.
The mutual similarity ?(Ci, Cj) between the news topics Cj and Ci can be defined
as:
?(Ci, Cj) = log
p(Ci, Cj)
p(Ci) · p(Cj)
(4)
where p(Ci, Cj) is the co-ocurrence probability of the relevant news topics Cj and Ci
in the corpus, p(Ci) and p(Cj) are the individual ocurrence probability of the news top-
ics Cj and Ci in the corpus. The underlying assumption behind the mutual similarity
measurement ?(Ci, Cj) is that two news topics co-occur frequently if they are strongly
relevant. The higher value of the mutual similarity ?(Ci, Cj) implies the stronger con-
texts ? (Ci, Cj) between the relevant news topics Cj and Ci.
Thus each news topic is automatically linked with multiple relevant news topics
with the higher values of the inter-topic contexts ? (·, ·). A portion of our large-scale
topic network is given in Fig. 2, where the news topics are connected and organized
according to the strength of their associations, ? (·, ·). One can observe that such topic
network can provide a good global overview of large-scale collections of news videos
at the topic level and can precisely characterize the interestingness of the relevant news
topics, thus it can be used to assist users on making better search decisions.
To integrate the topic network for supporting personalized topic recommendation, it
is very attractive to achieve graphical representation and visualization of the topic net-
work, so that the users can obtain a good global overview of large-scale collections of
news videos at the first glance and make better search decisions in the interactive topic
network exploration and navigation process. Thus the underlying topic network visu-
alization techniques should be able to provide a good balance between the local detail
and the global context. The local detail is used to help users focus on the news topics
of interest in their current focus. The global context is needed to tell the users where
the other relevant news topics are (i.e., which news topics they can search for next step)
and their contextual relationships with the news topic in the current focus, such global
context can suggest the new search directions effectively. Thus supporting visualiza-
tion and interactive navigation of the topic network is becoming a complementary and
necessary component for personalized news video recommendation system and it may
lead to the discovery of unexpected news videos and guide the future search directions
effectively.
Unfortunately, visualizing large-scale topic network in a 2D system interface with a
limited screen size is not a trivial task. To achieve more effective visualization of large-
scale topic network, we have developed multiple innovative techniques: (a) highlighting
Personalized News Video Recommendation 7
the news topics according to their interestingness scores for allowing users to obtain
the most important insights at the first glance; (b) integrating hyperbolic geometry to
create more space for large-scale topic network visualization and reduce the potential
overlappings via interactive exploration.
We have integrated both the popularity of the news topics and the importance of the
news topics to determine their interestingness scores. The popularity of a given news
topic is related to both the number of TV news programs which have discussed the given
news topic and the time length for the same TV news program to report the given news
topic. If one news topic is discussed by more TV news programs simultaneously or
reported by the same TV news program repeatedly for a long time, it tends to be more
interesting in general. The importance of a given news topic is related to its linkage
structure with other news topics on the topic network. If one news topic is related to
more news topics on the topic network, it tends to be more interesting. For example, the
news topic for “roadside bond in Iraq" may strongly relate to the news topics of “gas
price increase" and “stock price decrease". Thus the interestingness score ?(Ci) for a
given news topic Ci is defined as:
?(Ci) = ? ·
em(ci) ? e?m(ci)
em(ci) + e?m(ci)
+ ? ·
et(ci) ? e?t(ci)
et(ci) + e?t(ci)
+ ? ·
ek(ci) ? e?k(ci)
ek(ci) + e?k(ci)
(5)
where ?+?+? = 1, m(ci) is the number of TV news programs which have discussed
or reported the given news topic Ci simultaneously, t(ci) is the time length (days) for
the same TV news program to report the given news topic Ci repeatedly, k(ci) is the
number of news topics linked with the given news topic Ci on the topic network. Such
interestingness scores can be used to highlight the most interesting news topics and
eliminate the less interesting news topics for reducing the visual complexity for large-
scale topic network visualization and exploration.
Supporting graphical representation and visualization of the topic network can pro-
vide an effective solution for exploring large-scale collections of news videos at the
topic level and recommending the news topics of interest to the users interactively for
assisting them to make better search decisions. However, visualizing large-scale topic
network in a 2D system interface with a limited screen size is a challenging task. We
have investigated multiple solutions to tackle this challenge task: (a) A string-based ap-
proach is incorporated to visualize the topic network with a nested view, where each
news topic node is displayed closely with the most relevant news topic nodes according
to the values of their associations. The underlying inter-topic contexts are represented
as the linkage strings. (b) The geometric closeness of the news topic nodes is related
to the strength of their inter-topic contexts, so that such graphical representation of the
topic network can reveal a great deal about how these news topics are connected. (c)
Both geometric zooming and semantic zooming are integrated to adjust the levels of
visible details automatically according to the discerning constraint on the number of
news topic nodes that can be displayed per view.
Our approach for topic network visualization has exploited hyperbolic geometry [8].
The hyperbolic geometry is particularly well suited for achieving graph-based layout of
the topic network, and it has “more space" than Euclidean geometry. The essence of
our approach is to project the topic network onto a hyperbolic plane according to the
inter-topic contexts, and layout the topic network by mapping the relevant news topic
nodes onto a circular display region. Thus our topic network visualization scheme takes
8 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
the following steps: (a) The news topic nodes on the topic network are projected onto
a hyperbolic plane according to their inter-topic contexts by performing curvilinear
component analysis (CCA), and such CCA process can be obtained automatically by
preserving the local inter-topic contexts between the neighboring news topic nodes on
the topic network, e.g., through minimizing the following error function:
E({Ci}) =
1
2
n?
i=1
n?
j>i
?ij |?(Ci, Cj)? ? (Ci, Cj)|
2 (6)
where ? (Ci, Cj) is the strength of the inter-topic context between the news topics Ci
and Cj , the weight factors ?ij are chosen as a bounded and monotically descreasing
function to allow the CCA projection algorithm to preserve the strong inter-topic con-
texts than of weak inter-topic contexts (i.e., preserving the contexts between neigh-
boring news topic nodes on the topic network), and ?(Ci, Cj) is the location distance
between the news topics Ci and Cj on the hyperbolic plane.
?(Ci, Cj) = 2 · arctanh
(
|Xci ?Xcj |
|1?XciX¯cj |
)
(7)
where Xci and Xcj are the physical locations of the news topics on the hyperbolic
plane. In our current experiments, the weigh factors ?ij are characterized by using a
sigmoid function:
?ij =
e? (Ci,Cj)
e? (Ci,Cj) + 1
(8)
Through CCA projection, our algorithm can precisely preserve the local inter-topic
contexts, and the global geometry is also preserved effectively because the nearest
neighborhoods for the neighboring news topics are overlapped. (b) After such context-
preserving projection of the news topic nodes is obtained, Poincaré disk model [8] is
used to map the news topic nodes on the hyperbolic plane onto a 2D display coordinate.
Poincaré disk model maps the entire hyperbolic space onto an open unit circle, and
produces a non-uniform mapping of the news topic nodes to the 2D display coordinate.
4 Personalized News Video Recommendation
Because the same news topic may be reported many times in the same TV news program
or be discussed simultaneously by many TV news programs for different broadcast
stations, the amount of the news videos under the same news topic could be very large.
Thus topic-based news search via simplely keyword matching may return large amount
of news videos which are relevant to the same news topic. To reduce user’s information
overload, it is very important to develop new algorithms for ranking the news videos
under the same news topic and recommending the most relevant news videos according
to their importance and representiveness scores.
The news videos, which are relevant to the given news topic Cj , are ranked ac-
cording to their importance and representiveness scores. For the given news topic Cj ,
the importance and representativeness score %(x|Cj) for one particular news video x is
defined as:
%(x|Cj) = e
??t + (1? )
e?(x|Cj) ? e??(x|Cj)
e?(x|Cj) + e??(x|Cj)
(9)
Personalized News Video Recommendation 9
?(xj) = ? · v(x|Cj) + ? · r(x|Cj) + ? · q(x|Cj)
where ?+?+ ? = 1, ?t is the time difference between the broadcast time for the given
news video x for the particular TV news program and the time for the user to submit
their requests, v(x|Cj) is the visiting times for the given news video x from all the
users, r(x|Cj) is the rating score of the given news video x from all the users, q(x|Cj)
is the quality of the given news video.
We separate the time factor from other factors for news video ranking because the
time factor is more critical than other factors for news video ranking (i.e., one topic can
be treated as the news because it is new and tell people what is happening recently or
what is discussing recently) and most people may just want to know the most recently
reports for the given news topic. The quality q(x|Cj) is simply defined as the frame
resolution and the length of the given news video x. If a news video has higher frame
resolution and longer length (be discussed for longer time), it should be more important
and representative for the given news topic.
After the users’ search goals (i.e., which are represented by the accessed news top-
ics) are captured interactively, our personalized news video recommendation system
can: (a) recommend top 5 news videos according to their importance and representa-
tiveness scores; (b) recommend other news topics of interest on the topic network which
are most relevant to the accessed news topic and suggest them as the future search di-
rections according to the user’s current preferences, where the accessed news topic is
set as the current focus (i.e., the center of the topic network); (c) recommend the most
relevant online web news which are relevant with the accessed news topic, so that the
user can also read the most relevant online web news; (d) record the user’s search his-
tory and preferences for generating more reliable personalized topic network to make
better recommendation in the future. Some experimental results are given in Fig. 3, and
one can conclude that our personalized news video recommendation system can effec-
tively support multi-modal news recommendation from large-scale collections of news
videos.
5 Algorithm Evaluation
We carry out our experimental studies by using large-scale collections of news videos (3
TV news channels captured 24× 7 for more than 3 months). The topic network which
consists of 4000 most popular news topics is learned automatically from large-scale
collections of news videos. Our work on algorithm evaluation focus on: (1) evaluating
the performance of our news topic detection algorithm and assessing the advantages for
integrating multi-modal information channels for news topic detection; (2) evaluating
the response time for supporting change of focus in our system, which is critical for
supporting interactive navigation and exploration of large-scale topic network to enable
user-adaptive topic recommendation; (3) evaluating the performance (efficiency and
accuracy) of our system for allowing users to look for some particular news videos of
interest (i.e., personalized news video recommendation);
Automatic news topic detection plays an important role in our personalized news
video recommendation system. Based on this observation, our algorithm evaluation for
our automatic news topic detection algorithm focuses on comparing its performance
10 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
Fig. 3. Two examples for supporting personalized multi-modal news recommendation.
difference by combining different information channels for automatic news topic de-
tection. We have compared three combination scenarios for news topic detection: (a)
only the closed captions are used for news topic detection; (b) the closed captions and
the audio channel are integrated and synchronized for news topic detection; (c) the
closed captions, the audio channel and the video channel are seamlessly integrated and
synchronized for news topic detection. As shown in Fig. 4, integrating multi-modal in-
formation channels (cross-media) for news topic detection can enhance the performance
of our algorithm significantly.
Fig. 4. The comparision results of our automatic news topic detection algorithm by integrat-
ing different information channels.
One critical issue for evaluating our personalized news video recommendation sys-
tem is the response time for supporting change of focus to enable interactive topic net-
work navigation and exploration, which is critical for supporting user-adaptive topic
recommendation. In our system, the change of focus is used for achieving interactive
exploration and navigation of large-scale topic network. The change of focus is imple-
mented by changing the Poincaré mapping of the news topic nodes from the hyperbolic
plane to the display unit disk, and the positions of the news topic nodes in the hyerbolic
plane need not to be altered during the focus manipulation. Thus the response time for
supporting change of focus depends on two components: (a) The computational time
T1 for re-calculating the new Poincaré mapping of large-scale topic network from a
Personalized News Video Recommendation 11
hyperbolic plane to a 2D display unit disk, i.e., re-calculating the Poincaré position for
each news topic node; (b) The visualization time T2 for re-layouting and re-visualizing
the new Poincaré mapping of large-scale topic network on the display disk unit.
Because the computational time T1 may depend on the number of news topic nodes,
we have tested the performance differences for our system to re-calculate the Poincaré
mappings for different numbers of news topic nodes. Thus our topic network with 4000
news topic nodes is partitioned into 5 different scales: 500 nodes, 1000 nodes, 2000
nodes, 3000 nodes, 3500 nodes and 4000 nodes. We have tested the computational time
T1 for re-calculating the Poincaré mappings of different numbers of news topic nodes
when the focus is changed. From our experiments, we find that the computational time
T1 and the visualization time T2 are not sensitive to the number of news topics, and thus
re-calculating the Poincaré mapping and re-visualization for large-scale topic network
can almost be achieved in real time. Thus our system can support change of focus in
real time and achieve interactive navigation and exploration of large-scale topic network
effectively.
For a given news topic of interest (news topic that is accessed by the particular
user interactively), our system can further allow users to look for the most relevant
news videos for the given news topic according to their importance and representative
scores. To evaluate the effeciency and the accuracy of our personalized news video
recommendation system, the benchmark metric includes precision P and recall R. The
precision P is used to characterize the accuracy of our system for finding the most
relevant news videos according to their importance and representativeness scores for
the given news topic, and the recall R is used to characterize the efficiency of our
system for finding the most relevant news videos according to their importance and
representativeness scores for the given news topic.
Table 1 gives the precision and recall of our personalized news video recommen-
dation system. From these experimental results, one can observe that our system can
support personalized news video recommendation effectively, thus users are allowed to
obtain the most relevant news videos according to their importance and representative-
ness scores for the requested news topic.
6 Conclusions
A novel framework is developed to support personalized news video recommendation.
To allow users to obtain a good global overview of large-scale collections of news
videos at the topic level, topic network and hyperbolic visualization are seamlessly in-
tegrated to achieve user-adaptive topic recommendation. Thus users can obtain the news
topics of interest interactively, build up their mental models of news needs easily and
make better search decisions by selecting the visible news topics directly. Our system
can further recommend the relevant web news, the new search directions, and the most
relevant news videos according to their importance and representativeness scores. Our
experiments on large-scale collections of news videos have provided positive results.
Acknowledgment
This work is supported by National Science Foundation under 0601542-IIS and 0208539-
IIS. Hangzai Luo is recently supported by Shanghai Pujiang Program under 08PJ1404600,
NSFC 60496325 and 60803077, CSM 07dz5997, 863 R & D 2006AA010111.
12 Hangzai Luo, Jianping Fan, Daniel A. Keim, and Shin’ichi Satoh
Table 1. The precision and recall for supporting personalized news video recommendation.
news topics policy pentagon change dennis hastert matter
P/R 95.6% /97.3% 98.5% /98.9% 100% /99.2% 95.3% /88.3% 85.2% /85.3%
news topics implant wedding haggard scandal ethic
P/R 90.2% /93.5% 96.3% /94.5% 96.5% /92.8% 96.6% /97.3% 93.3% /95.6%
news topics gate steny hoyer democrat safety investigation
P/R 95.9% /96.8% 96.5% /96.2% 96.3% /97.1% 94.5% /94.8% 93.3% /96.5%
news topics majority leader confirmation child tax reduction
P/R 99.2% /98.6% 93.8% /99.3% 94.5% /93.8% 91.3% /91.5% 98.5% /96.9%
news topics secretary veterm ceremony beijing 2008 program
P/R 100% /98.8% 99.8% /99.2% 99.3% /96.6% 99.2% /97.3% 83.5% /90.2%
news topics honor vietnam lesson teacher conduct
P/R 91.2% /93.5% 98.8% /96.7% 90.3% /91.6% 93.8% /94.5% 87.92% /88.3%
news topics minority indonesia president republican amish
P/R 100% /99.6% 96.8% /97.7% 100% /96.8% 91.6% /92.8% 99.5% /91.6%
news topics o.j. sinpson trial money nuclear test china
P/R 95.6% /99.4% 90.5% /90.3% 100% /90.6% 100% /97.6% 97.3% /95.2%
news topics john kerry military race north korea japan
P/R 100% /96.5% 100% /93.2% 100% /97.8% 100% /99.3% 98.5% /95.6%
news topics election leadship school gun shoot sex message
P/R 100% /95.5% 92.8% /90.3% 100% /96.7% 97.5% /98.2% 88.3% /87.6%
References
1. G. Marchionini, Information seeking in electronic environments, Cambridge University
Press, 1997.
2. B. Yang, T. Mei, X.-S. Hua, L. Yang, S.-Q. Yang, M. Li, “Online video recommendation
based on multimodal fusion and relevance feedback", ACM CIVR’07, pp.73-80, 2007.
3. J.A. Wise, J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M. Pottier, A. Schur, V. Crow, “Visualizing
the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction with information from text documents", IEEE
InfoVis’95, pp.51-58, 1995.
4. R.C. Swan, J. Allan, “TimeMine: visualizing automatically constructed timelines", ACM
SIGIR, 2000.
5. M. Weskamp, “Newsmap", http://www.marumushi.com/newsmap/index.cfm.
6. S. Havre, B. Hetzler, P. Whitney, L. Nowell, “ThemeRiver: Visualizing thematic changes in
large document collections", IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol.8,
no.1, pp.9-20, 2002.
7. H. Luo, J. Fan, J. Yang, W. Ribarsky, S. Satoh, “Large-scale new video classification and
hyperbolic visualization", IEEE VAST’07, pp.107-114, 2007.
8. H. Luo, J. Fan, J. Yang, W. Ribarsky, S. Satoh, “Exploring large-scale video news via inter-
active visualization", IEEE VAST’06, pp. 75-82, 2006.
9. W. Lai, X.-S. Hua, W.-Y. Ma, “Towards content-based relevance ranking for video search",
ACM Multimedia, pp.627-630, 2006.
10. J. Teevan, S. Dumais, E. Horvitz, “Personalized search via automated analysis of interests
and activities", ACM SIGIR, 2005.
11. H. Wactlar, A. Hauptmann, Y. Gong, M. Christel, “Lessons learned from the creation and de-
ployment of a terabyte digital video library", IEEE Computer, vol.32, no.2, pp.66-73, 1999.
12. M.G. Christel, R. Yang, “Merging stryboard strategies and automatic retrieval for improving
interactive video search", ACM CIVR’07, 2007.

