SEEKING THE CITY378
1 INTRODUCTION 
Our work encompasses subjects of urban planning, 
urban design, urban morphology, and the link 
between geographical information systems (GIS) 
and urban visualization. Our area of research 
focuses on the way people conceptualize the 
urban environment. The visualization technique 
discussed in this paper is an attempt to provide 
users with a tool to create their own sense of urban 
legibility, which allows them to gain an intuitive 
and deep understanding of the urban model and 
its social, cultural, and economic relationships. 
Although people interpret the city differently, it 
is agreed upon that all people understand the 
city through its physical elements. The concept 
of urban legibility, made famous by Kevin Lynch 
in the 1960s, recognizes that people intuitively 
categorize a city’s physical elements 11. Instead of 
visualizing the urban environment as a collection of 
random physical elements, Lynch makes apparent 
that people aggregate the city into identifi able 
components. For example, he says the city can 
be defi ned by paths, edges, districts, nodes, and 
landmarks. This cognitive mapping approach to 
understanding the urban environment depicts 
Lynch’s elements through a simplifi cation method, 
and is the methodological base of our system. 
Our visualization tool, Urban Vis, provides a 
way to view the spatial layout of a city and the 
characteristics of areas through demographic 
information. What is the relationship of low 
income areas to downtown? Do schools service 
a suffi cient number of homes? Will rezoning an 
area affect a nearby neighborhood? Is an older 
neighborhood built upon a unique fi gure ground 
pattern? Questions about the physical and social 
infrastructure of the city can be analyzed using 
our tool. 
In comparison to existing GIS systems, our 
tool offers a new way to understand the urban 
environment through a clustering algorithm 
allowing for various levels of abstraction to occur. 
The clusters represent various spatial boundaries, 
which contribute to the user’s geographic 
perspective. This multi-resolution technique is a 
new geometric and form based way to explore the 
underlying foundation of a city.
In order to validate the effectiveness of our tool, 
we surveyed fourteen experts who regularly 
Visualizing GIS: Urban Form and Data Structure
GINETTE WESSEL 
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
REMCO CHANG
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
ERIC SAUDA
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
379
investigate urban environments. The examinees’ 
occupations ranged from geographic information 
experts to school district planners to real estate 
developers. After demonstrating our tool, the 
experts were able to visualize the urban form and 
data into a cohesive image while retaining their 
sense of urban legibility. Collectively the experts 
expressed that our visualization tool offers new 
techniques to help them perform their daily tasks.
The collaborative efforts of the College of 
Architecture and the Visualization Center at UNCC 
have developed a rich approach to understanding 
complex urban environments. These efforts 
have also lead to technical discussions of this 
work at the 2007 IEEE Information Visualization 
Symposium17.
2 CONCEPTS IN URBAN LEGIBILITY 
For purposes of this research, there is a need to 
differentiate between urban planning and urban 
design. Urban planning focuses largely on the use 
of social, economic, and political factors when 
evaluating urban growth and development7. Most 
of these factors are important to our understanding 
of the city, but for our research, they do not 
focus enough attention on the geometric forms 
of the city. Typically, urban planning explores the 
connection of social and political factors to urban 
form and is visualized on a local scale rather than 
a city or regional scale9. For our investigation, it is 
important to examine how economic factors affect 
the city at various scales. Urban design allows us 
to focus more attention on the form and geometry 
of the city. Traditionally, simple geometric models 
of the city have been the basis of discussion and 
design, either in planimetric view13, in sequential 
perspective view4, or using cognitive mapping11. 
We introduce a view of the city unlike prior models 
that can convey information to the user through 
multiple perspectives.
In the 1970s, Robert Venturi introduced a new 
perspective of the urban environment. Learning
form Las Vegas, by Venturi and et al., examined 
how people understood the city through signs, 
symbols, space, and speed. They recognize that 
the city is not just a place of architecture and 
economic interaction, but it communicates a new 
urban understanding through iconology and the 
city’s changing geometric form18. More recent 
work by Rem Koolhass at Harvard has begun to 
examine the urban environment with relation to 
technological impacts. He seeks to weave economic, 
political, and social factors explicitly into the 
development of urban form while understanding 
that the linkage is not methodologically the same 
as before but impacted through digital networks 
19. Bill Mitchell, in his book City of Bits 12, wrote 
about the emergence of urban forms that changes 
ideas of  xed space. He believes digital and spatial 
networks contribute to a new sense of urban 
understanding. 
Our investigation covers urban concepts that 
offer a perspective of reading the city in modern 
day context. By using basic principles of urban 
legibility, we can then apply them to visualization 
techniques. The result of this work will improve 
user’s legible construct of the complex urban 
environment.
3 EXISTING GIS SYSTEMS
Often geographical information systems can limit 
a user’s ability to understand a 2D or 3D urban 
model environment. The perspective from which 
the user navigates the environment is important 
to his interpretation of its spatial layout. In most 
existing systems, the method by which a user 
navigates data may limit their perspective. These 
GIS systems commonly offer a zoom tool that 
allows the user to drag a bounding box over an area 
of focus. This method of navigating a scene may 
lose the user’s sense of spatial relationships with 
the surrounding context. Furthermore, accurately 
representing complex environments requires 
multiple layers of data. Existing systems either 
represent these layers by using multiple colors 
thus limiting a user’s ability to decipher between 
data, or they require procedural methods to 
analyze data, which may cost extensive amounts 
of time to perform.  
In designing our tool, we incorporate highly 
interactive techniques for navigating and examining 
the urban environment as well as state of the art 
information visualization methods to correlate 
disparate layers of data. This unique combination 
allows the user to quickly gain intuitive and deep 
understanding of both urban form and data.      
VISUALIZING GIS
SEEKING THE CITY380
4 HOW THE SYSTEM WORKS
Urban Vis uses two views (Fig. 1): a 3D model 
view and a multi-dimensional data view. The two 
views are displayed on two separate screens or 
monitors providing ef cient window management. 
Both views allow user interaction, and link the de-
mographic data and the physical geometric ob-
jects. The 3D model view shows clusters of build-
ings based on urban legibility elements in order 
to provide persistent spatial awareness within the 
urban environment. The data view displays infor-
mation of the clusters shown in the 3D model view 
adding an extra perspective for understanding the 
city. Together, the views allow the user to explore 
the urban model from both the geographical and 
the informational angles. 
4.1 3D Model View 
The 3D model view (Fig. 1) allows the user to rec-
ognize a sense of placement within the urban en-
vironment through geometric forms. It also pro-
vides an instant understanding of the basic frame-
work of the urban environment. More importantly, 
it serves as an exploratory tool in which the user 
can interactively navigate the city using either a 
mouse or keyboard while viewing the environment 
at any distance or angle. 
The user controls the point of focus through a yel-
low sphere connected to the ground plane with 
a line (Fig. 2a). The user can move the sphere 
around the map and also up and down to change 
the level of clustering. For example, when the 
sphere is high above the ground, the cluster sizes 
are larger, allowing the user to see overviews of 
the entire area. Likewise, when the sphere is low-
er to the ground, cluster sizes under the sphere 
are  ner, allowing the user to inspect a speci c 
local region (Fig. 2b). To the user’s advantage, the 
focus region is not a  xed area or diameter but 
varies with distance from the focus point directly 
under the sphere. For a clear depiction of the area 
being studied, a color gradient from red to blue is 
displayed on the point focus. These colors provide 
a link between the two views and indicate to the 
user how narrow or wide the focus currently is.
Double-clicking on a cluster highlights it (Fig. 1) 
Fig. 1: UrbanVis overview. The data view on the left displays demographic data of the areas around the focus point 
(focus in the middle). The model view on the right shows the clustered building models. The color gradient indicates the 
distance from the focus point and provides a visual link between the two different data views (matrix view and parallel 
coordinates) and the model view. The data shown is the 2000 census data for the city of Charlotte in Mecklenburg County, 
North Carolina.
381VISUALIZING GIS
along with its data properties in the data view 
(Fig. 1). Also the 3D model view allows the user 
to view another perspective of the urban model 
seen as individual buildings rather than clusters 
for a closer inspection (Fig. 2d).
4.2 Data View 
The data view (Fig. 1) consists of two parts that 
display the same information in different ways 
through a matrix panel and a parallel coordinates 
panel17. The panels show data for a building or 
building cluster relative to where the focal point 
is located. The data used in this paper is demo-
graphic data of Charlotte, North Carolina, from 
the 2000 Census, but any type of geographically 
referenced data (e.g., employment statistics, traf-
 c statistics, crime rates, etc.) could be shown. 
The matrix panel (top portion of the data view) 
has the option of switching between bar charts, 
line charts, or gradient charts to accommodate 
the user’s preference (Fig. 3). The panel is orga-
nized in columns that are each linked to a cluster. 
To clearly understand the linkage between views, 
the columns are labeled with colors that corre-
spond to cluster colors in the model view. The col-
umns change as the user moves the focus around 
the city. 
Each row of the bar/line/gradient charts shows a 
speci c dimension of the represented data. The 
graphs are color-coded to show groupings of re-
lated categories, making quick identi cation and 
orientation easier. In Figure 1, left, there are 
14 categories of data, separated into 6 different 
groups (ethnicity, citizenship, job status, etc.). 
The bottom section of the data view shows the 
same demographic data, but using the parallel 
coordinates technique (Fig. 4)8. Like the matrix 
panel, the lines in the parallel coordinates panel 
are color-coded to match the cluster colors, and 
they correspond to the colors of the rows in the 
matrix view. This parallel coordinates panel adds 
another perspective to visualizing relationships 
between dimensions of the data. For example, in 
Figure 4 notice the positive correlation between 
                  (a)                                     (b)                                    (c)                                      (d)
Fig. 2: Changing the zoom level of the focal point (shown as a yellow sphere and a line connecting it to the ground). The 
color gradient from red to blue shows the proximity of the clusters to the focus. (a) When the sphere is far away from the 
ground, the region of interest is larger, and the user can see an overview of the area at a glance; (b) when the sphere is 
closer to the ground, the region of interest and clusters are smaller, thus allowing a more detailed inspection. (c) The user 
selects and highlights a cluster in the model (shown as white); (d) at any time, the user can change the view to look at 
individual buildings instead of clusters. 
Fig. 3: Matrix panel can show different displays of the 
same data; (top) bar charts; (middle) line charts; (bot-
tom) gradient grid charts. When sorting columns, the 
closer the clusters are to the focal point, the closer the 
column is to the middle of the screen (and more red in 
color).
SEEKING THE CITY382
the Hispanic population, the percentage of for-
eigners, and the percentage of residents who rent 
their housing in these selected areas.
Although the two views depict the same data, we 
 nd that the different presentations of the data 
give the user different types of understanding18. 
The top matrix view shows the relationship be-
tween clusters of buildings that are close to each 
other. For example, the user can quickly see the 
homogeneity of the neighborhoods around the fo-
cal point. On the other hand, the parallel coor-
dinates view cannot give insight to spatial rela-
tionships, but it can quickly reveal relationships 
between data dimensions, allowing the user to 
easily identify positive or negative correlations 
between categories. 
4.3 Category Slider 
This visualization system also offers a slider tool, 
which allows for closer investigation of speci c 
data (Fig. 5). As the user moves the slider left to 
right, the model and data views update interac-
tively, highlighting the clusters that ful ll the cri-
terion. The clusters that do not meet the speci ed 
criteria are still visible in a darker shade on order 
to maintain the user’s spatial awareness.  
5 USER EVALUATIONS 
To effectively evaluate our system, we asked ex-
perts who study the urban environment to give 
their input about the usefulness of the system. 
The experts have various backgrounds ranging 
from independent real estate development, the 
Center for Real Estate at UNC Charlotte, the UNC 
Charlotte Urban Institute, Charlotte Mecklenburg 
County Geographic Information Systems Of ce, 
Planning Department, and School System. To 
begin the evaluation, we gave the participants a 
questionnaire which asked questions about their 
knowledge skills with GIS systems. This enabled 
us to better understand the backgrounds of the 
sample population. Next we introduced the par-
ticipants to our system by demonstrating its fea-
tures and capabilities. After brie ng the partici-
pants about the system, we then asked them to 
give feedback on the usefulness of the system as 
well as any suggestions for future improvements. 
With their consent, the users were tape-recorded 
during these sessions. Furthermore, all experts 
agreed to have their comments, names, and af li-
ations appear in this publication.
Most of the participants felt choosing their area 
of focus was bene cial in their exploration of the 
urban data. They commented that moving to dif-
Fig. 4: User example: Finding neighborhoods with high Hispanic population near the downtown area: (right) the user starts 
by putting the focal point over the downtown region; (left) using brushing in the parallel coordinates window, the user 
highlights the regions that have high Hispanic population. Notice the positive correlation between the Hispanic population, 
the percentage of foreigners, and the percentage of residents who rent their housing in these selected areas.
Fig. 5: The category slider locates buildings that  t 
a speci c criterion. In this example, only buildings in 
Charlotte that are built after 1985 are shown. 
383VISUALIZING GIS
ferent regions in the environment maintained 
their spatial awareness of the surrounding areas. 
Therefore, they were able to visualize the data not 
only for the area of focus but also the data for the 
outlying areas. The planning specialist of Charlotte 
Mecklenburg School System commented that us-
ing this technique would allow her to focus on the 
potential sites of a new school, and still show the 
“projections of future student populations based 
on surrounding new housing developments.” 
Another advantage commented upon is the ability 
of the system to adjust spatial boundaries. As the 
level of abstraction changes so do the boundar-
ies allowing the user to de ne their own speci ed 
area of detail. Some of the participants found the 
ease of adjustable boundaries to provide a way to 
project the impact of locating new developments. 
The one user who did not  nd this technique use-
ful commented that most projects he worked on 
had strict boundary requirements. With these re-
strictions, it had never been necessary for him to 
examine surrounding areas. 
The use of two integrated displays, the 3D view 
and the data view, also proved useful to the ex-
perts who handle large amounts of data. They felt 
working with a sizable amount of data is easier to 
organize and access through dual display systems. 
They also commented that the displays increase 
user production rates because they are integrated 
cohesively. Still further, another expert mentioned 
that the display allows the user to  nd where he 
wants to study, and then it immediately tells him 
the data for that location on the data view without 
having to use tools to  nd it.
A majority of experts felt the multiple ways to view 
data made it easier to see relationships between 
areas in the urban environment. A user comment-
ed, “Sometimes users have to sort through a lot 
of different sources of data or run statistical anal-
ysis to  nd relationships. Your tool is providing 
an on-the- y, interactive way of instantly noticing 
nearby statistical data and their relationships.” 
One expert noted the strengths of our system elo-
quently. “Essentially what you are providing with 
this tool is a spatially sensitive graphic display. 
The strength of this tool is the dynamic table that 
displays areas in a spatially understandable way. 
In other software systems, the user is required to 
scan the tabular listed rows of a GIS database, 
which gives no indication of the rows’ geospatial 
locations or their relationships between one an-
other. Another strong aspect is the fact that your 
focus area and peripheral areas are cohesively 
orientated. When that aspect is combined with 
the ability to change the level of detail through 
clustering, the user gains a new dimension [of un-
derstanding]. Changing the level of detail in other 
software programs becomes cumbersome from 
running [multiple repetitive] queries.”
Our evaluation demonstrated that the system is 
set aside from existing GIS systems in that it al-
lows the user to maintain a clear understanding of 
the area of focus and the peripheral areas at once. 
The system cohesively integrates the 3D Model 
View and the Data View allowing the user to see 
the relationships between the geospatial informa-
tion of the urban model and related demographic 
information at the same time. This technique of 
viewing data allows for easy identi cation of cor-
relations between the categories. The experts in 
our user study collectively found our system to 
contain features that fundamentally change the 
way users would interact with urban data, en-
hancing their ability to better understand the ur-
ban model. 
6 CONCLUSIONS
Our research applies the combination of data 
with geometric modeling to transform the man-
ner in which we read the city. If the city was once 
convincingly represented by its geometric limits 
and cohesion (e.g. the city gate), it is now repre-
sented by a loose weave of objects, paths, data, 
and connections. Our implementation of UrbanVis 
captures this experience. 
Although one’s sense of urban legibility is inher-
ently subjective and changes depending on one’s 
perspective of the city, the success of UrbanVis 
has demonstrated that maintaining the user’s 
sense of legibility, however dif cult, is the  rst 
step in helping the user to understand the urban 
environment. While each user’s sense of legibility 
is different, we have found that there exists some 
commonality between identi able elements such 
as the ones suggested by Lynch. As long as the 
legibility is preserved, the user can freely navi-
gate and explore the urban model without losing 
SEEKING THE CITY384
his spatial awareness or understanding of the en-
vironment.
However, the most important step in understand-
ing an urban environment, as shown by our evalu-
ation of UrbanVis, is the combination of the old 
sense of legibility with the new concepts intro-
duced by Venturi, Koolhaas, and Mitchell. Lynch’s 
principals in urban legibility provide a user with 
the spatial understanding of an urban model, but 
it is with the newer concepts that the user under-
stands the complex social, cultural, and economic 
relationships within a city. By integrating the two 
sets of theories as demonstrated by UrbanVis, the 
user gets a richer, deeper understanding of a city 
both geographically and conceptually. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Steve Ott, Jeff Michael, 
Victoria Bott, Charlynn Burd, Kurt Olmsted, Todd 
Wilson, Tobin Bradley. Andy Goretti, Paul Martin, 
Lori Quinn, Christine Hamlett, Jennifer Dean, Ed 
Harris, and David Stewart for their time, invalu-
able feedback and suggestions; to Dale Loberger 
and Paul Gallimore of ESRI for their encourage-
ment and comments.
ENDNOTES
1. Remco Chang and others, Hierarchical simpli ca-
tion of city models to maintain urban legibility, sketch, 
2006, SIGGRAPH ‘06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Sketches, 
ACM Press: New York, NY. p 130.
2. Remco Chang and others, “Hierarchical simpli cation 
of city models to maintain urban legibility,” Technical 
Report CVC-UNCC-06-01, Visualization Center, Univer-
sity of North Carolina at Charlotte, (2006). 
3. Chuihua J. Chung, Jeffrey Inaba, and Rem Koolhaas, 
ed., Great Leap Forward (Köln: Taschen Publishers, 
2001). 
4. Gordon Cullen, The Concise Townscape (New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1975).
5. Mark Gahegan and others, “Introducing GeoVIS-
TAStudio: an integrated suite of visualization and com-
putational methods for exploration and knowledge con-
struction in geography,” Computers, Environment and 
Urban Systems 26, no. 4 (2002): 267-292. 
6.  Michael Garland and Yuan Zhou. “Quadric-based 
simpli cation in any dimension,” ACM Transaction on 
Graphics 24, no. 2 (2005): 209-239.
7. Alexander Garvin, The American City: What Works 
and What Doesn’t (New York: Mc-Graw Hill, 2002).
8. Alfred Inselberg and Bernard Dimsdale. “Parallel 
coordinates: A tool for visualizing multi-dimensional 
geometry,” IEEE Visualization Proceedings of the 1st 
conference on Visualization ‘90, (1990): 361-378. 
9.  Henri Lefebvre, The Production of Space (Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd, 1991). 
10. Mark Livingston and others, “An augmented reality 
system for military operations in urban terrain,” Pro-
ceedings of the Interservice / Industry Training, Simu-
lation, and Education Conference, (2002): 89. 
11. Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City (Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1960). 
12. William J. Mitchell, City of Bits: Space, Place, and 
the Infobahn (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996). 
13. Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City (Cam-
bridge: MIT Press, 1978). 
14. Poonam Shanbhag, Penny Rheingans, and Marie 
desJardins, “Temporal Visualization of Planning Poly-
gons for Ef cient Partitioning of Geo-Spatial Data,” Pro-
ceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Information 
Visualization, (2005): 28. 
15. U.S. Census Bureau [database online], (United 
States 2000 Census); available from http://www.cen-
sus.gov; Internet. 
16. Peter Wonka and others, “Guided visibility sam-
pling,” Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2006, (2006): 
494-502.
17. Remco Chang and others, “Legible Cities: Focus-
Dependent Multi-Resolution Visualization of Urban Re-
lationships,” Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Symposium 
on Information Visualization, (2007).
18. Robert Venturi, Denise S. Brown, and Steven 
Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten 
Symbolism of Architectural Form (Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1977).
19. Rem Koolhaas and others, Mutations: Harvard Proj-
ect on the City (Barcelona: ACTAR, 2000).

