  
URBAN VISUALIZATION 
Urban Design and Computer Visualization 
GINETTE M. WESSEL, ERIC J. SAUDA 
College of Architecture, Storrs Hall 
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, NC  
gmwessel@uncc.edu, ejsauda@uncc.edu 
AND 
REMCO CHANG 
Charlotte Visualization Center, Woodward Hall 
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, NC 
rchang@uncc.edu 
Abstract. Historically, the city represents not just a collection of 
buildings, but also the concrete cosmology of the world. The importance 
of geometry in this context is that one can be assured that one’s 
understanding of the form of the city will correspond to meaning. It is this 
reading that is the canonical visualization method of the city form. But 
contemporary urban designers are confronted by cities with overlapping 
systems of movement and information that has made the reading of 
geometry insufficient for an understanding of the city. There is an active 
discussion about the role of the physical setting amid the proliferation of 
mobility and information. Our interdisciplinary team of researchers has 
been studying issues related to urban visualization from the perspectives of 
urban design and computer visualization. Together, we have published 
work demonstrating how very large and disparate data sets can be 
visualized and integrated in unique ways. Building on this existing work 
that connects the two disciplines, this paper presents a survey of six urban 
design methodologies that may be useful for visualization. Each approach 
is described through a brief history, a conceptual overview and a 
diagrammatic exegesis. The conclusion presents an overview of the 
complementary natures of the discourses in urban design and computer 
visualization and a prospectus for application of the identified 
methodologies to computer urban visualization. We conclude that urban 
theories can inform urban visualization both as a method of informing 
generation and run-time simplification of 3D geometric modeling and in 
managing information visualization overlay issues for the very large, over-
lapping data sets. 
Keywords. Visualization: urbanism. 
2 G. WESSEL, E. SAUDA, AND R. CHANG  
1. Introduction 
This paper is intended as a survey of urban design theory positions and their 
possible applicability to alternative conceptions of urban visualization. We are 
specifically interested in urban design rather than urban planning. Our working 
distinction between them is that planning is usually focused on policy issues 
while urban design is focused on the form of the city. We do not intend for this 
to be an historical survey. We are interested in only those theories that 
specifically address ideas of legibility, which implies an interest in the existing 
fabric rather than in utopian solutions. Our interest is specifically concerned with 
the manner in which the insights and schemas of the theorists might be applied 
as principles for computer visualizations of complex urban environments. 
2. Cognitive Mapping 
How do we mentally simplify complex urban environments? 
The cognitive mapping approach is based on the perceptual methods by 
which we structure and store spatial knowledge. E.C. Tolman introduced the 
idea of cognitive maps as a description of a general psychological process. 
Kevin Lynch published The Image of the City, centered on the idea of 
“imagablilty” which studies the perceptual elements of the city and their 
cognitive prominence.  
Lynch’s work provides basic techniques for understanding the mental map of 
the city through recognizing that the landscape has definable elements, which he 
identifies as paths, edges, districts, nodes, and landmarks (Lynch, 1960). These 
elements are descriptive of urban spatial organization and are a universal set of 
methods for navigating a city. He believes that these elements are also directly 
related to the form, organization, and function of cities.  
Lynch’s ideas of cognitive mapping are well developed for the readings of 
both existing urban visualization (Darken & Sibert, 1996) and for virtual worlds 
(Ingram & Benford, 1996). The five elements identified by Lynch can each be 
implemented to parse complex urban models into cognitive units (Fig. 1). For 
example, districts can be identified both by the repetition of blocks or building 
geometries and by the complementary identification of edges.  
 
Figure 1. Diagram of cognitive mapping concepts. 
3. Experiential Approach 
How do the experiences of movement, uncovering, and texture make a city? 
 URBAN VISUALIZATION 3 
Cities have sometimes been understood as a form of constructed landscape, a 
view that emphasizes the visual unfolding of the urban environment. This view 
is often associated with the picturesque both in garden design, and by extension, 
urban form. 
English architect Gordon Cullen exemplifies the experiential approach in his 
book The Concise Townscape, a collection of images and essays that express the 
city through unfolding vision. Most of his examples are small English towns 
whose growth was incremental and circumstantial.  
Cullen’s experiential approach uses three elements in order to analyze a 
complex environment or townscape: optics, place, and content (Cullen, 1975).  
He introduces optics as the concept of serial vision in which movement at a 
uniform speed through an environment both embraces an existing view and hints 
at possible emerging views. Place refers to a journey through pressures and 
vacuums (Broadbent, 1990) such as, enclosure, gateway, change of level, and 
narrowing. Content refers to the surface of place that contains visual 
organization through style, texture, material, and color. Cullen’s introduction of 
texture is unique; it is not a common topic among other urban theorists; he 
relates this to an emotional reaction to the city through aesthetics.  
 
Figure 2. A diagram of this experiential approach involving the modeling of space (rather than 
solid) and the generation of surface maps. 
4. Rules Approach 
How can one principle be iteratively applied to all levels of the city? 
Often urban theorists construct a set of rules or principles that are descriptive 
of the city. The rules can apply to a multitude of elements at various scales.  
Architect Christopher Alexander was educated in mathematics and 
architecture at Cambridge University. This combination of disciplines is evident 
in much of his work. His first book, Notes on the Synthesis of Form, explicitly 
deals with the application of mathematics and computers to design. A Pattern 
Language, while it recants any interest in computers, nevertheless offers a 
knowledge-based approach to towns, buildings, and construction (Alexander et 
al., 1977). A New Theory of Urban Design addresses the question of how we can 
create built environments that embody the quality of “wholeness” evident in 
traditional towns and settlements (Hakim, 1991). While it is more than a little 
hard to give a single definition to what Alexander means by wholeness, he 
seems to be interested in elements at all scales in the urban environment. His 
book attempts to recapture the process of how cities develop organically and 
maintain a quality of wholeness in an organized manner. 
4 G. WESSEL, E. SAUDA, AND R. CHANG  
Alexander’s concepts contribute to urban legibility through his “Seven Rules 
of Detailed Growth” which apply directly to elements in all levels of the built 
environment (Alexander et al., 1987). The rules are piecemeal growth, growth of 
larger wholes, vision of growth, positive urban space, large building restates 
urban context, construction reinforces whole, and “centers” created at all scales. 
This recursive approach to analyzing levels of the environment allows people to 
see the environment not as one whole entity but as sets of relationships. 
 
Figure 3. Diagram of a generative system using recursion. 
5. Typological Approach 
How do individual buildings or spaces grow into a city? 
The typological approach begins with the premise that cities are built from 
individual pieces of architecture, each of which is established by a building type 
that includes aspects of space, construction, circulation, and grouping. This 
approach is based on an understanding of “type” that includes both this idea of 
building type as well as ideas about typologies of public space. 
Aldo Rossi, in The Architecture of the City, explains the city as a gigantic 
man-made object composed of artifacts. Rossi reads the urban environment 
through the way buildings, neighborhoods, and districts were formed. He created 
a typological system based on how structures have common characteristics. 
First, he categorized the kinds of buildings into types (such as libraries or 
schools) and then established laws based on their fundamental method of 
construction. From these laws, he established further laws from which building 
types are grouped. For example, a single family home can be categorized as a 
type, and it is understood through a set of laws, applied to individual cases and 
to groupings. 
Concepts of typologies in a city are also apparent in Urban Space by Robert 
Krier, which focuses on a thorough analysis of typologies of urban spaces. Krier 
believes the physical form of the city is determined by the relationships between 
the streets and the open spaces, the elevations and sections that enclose them 
(Broadbent, 1990) leading to a volumetric and 3-D understanding of the city. It 
is by studying these elements of urban space that a series of typologies may be 
generated. The typologies originate from three main forms: square, circular, or 
triangular. Through a diagrammatic process, Krier makes various adjustments to 
the forms. For example, he says the forms can be independent or work together; 
they can transform through processes, such as addition, overlapping, and 
penetrating (Krier, 1979).  
 URBAN VISUALIZATION 5 
 
Figure 4. Diagram of the typological system. 
6.  Space Syntax Approach 
How do human occupation and culture connect through space? 
Space syntax is a method pioneered by Bill Hillier in his books, A Social 
Logic of Space and Space in the Machine. This approach attempts to use precise 
mathematical notation to connect human occupation and space. Hillier’s ideas of 
spatial patterns focus on measuring movement (pedestrian and automobile) and 
urban grid configuration influence.  
Space syntax utilizes three basic conceptions of space: isovist, meaning the 
view from any particular point; axial space, referring to a straight line or 
possible path; and convex space, describing an occupyable void (Hillier, 1984). 
Interestingly, these concepts map cleanly to the compositional ideas of point, 
line, and space.  
Much of the analysis using this method involves using graph theory or a 
variant as a method of mapping the geometric structure onto a planar dual of 
human use. This procedure involves beginning with a town map, generating a 
convex map of spaces, and then an axial map of routes through the spaces based 
on movement and view. The graphs can then be analyzed for both connectivity 
(the number of adjacent elements) and integration (both local and global). 
The space syntax method is often linked to the study of urban morphology, 
which examines various structures embedded within the city.  
 
Figure 5. Diagram of space syntax. 
7.  City.org Approach 
How do non-physical networks interact with city form? 
The city has been transformed by the increase of information and digital 
technology. We need new methods to read the urban environment that recognize 
the shift in roles of urban geometry and the flow of information. 
6 G. WESSEL, E. SAUDA, AND R. CHANG  
Robert Venturi , in Learning from Las Vegas, studies the Las Vegas strip 
both for its architecture and for its use of signage as an equivalent to 
architecture. Venturi noted that the contemporary city was evolving to respond 
to widespread use of the automobile, and the way people read, understand, and 
navigate the new city. Based on his interest in iconology as a historical method, 
he reads Las Vegas as a place filled with symbolism, signs, and information that 
creates a city that can be described as architecture of communication over space 
(Venturi et al., 1972). Space, scale, speed, and symbol were used to analyze the 
roadside architecture of Las Vegas, and were given equal importance with the 
more conventional analysis of geometric and planametric form.  
Rem Koolhaas’ books, S, M, L, XL and Mutations discuss how 
communication networks and economic forces affect the physical environment. 
Rem Koolhaas relates architecture and the city to current social, economic, and 
cultural issues. The purpose is to extrapolate possible futures for the city based 
on current trends using new graphic design languages to represent the city. The 
research presents cities not as an architecturally neat system, but as a sometimes 
chaotic series of shifts, overlaps, and displacements of layers (Soane, 2007). 
Stan Allen’s book Points and Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City 
deals most explicitly with the implications of digital technologies and their 
impact on architecture and the city. While he cites critics who believe that 
architecture will fade away under the advance of technology, Allen’s view is 
that the physicality of architecture will continue to distinguish it from other 
media, although it will be transformed. His view of that transformation is based 
on an idea of field theory that sees architecture not as an isolated object of 
geometric perfection, but rather as the result of the flow and overlap of forces, 
many of them extending beyond the physical site of a single building (Allen, 
1999).  
 
Figure 6. Diagram of City.org concepts. 
8.  Computer Visualization 
There has been a history of using architectural theories in computer graphics and 
visualization. From building virtual worlds, creating plausible 3D building 
models and cities, navigating virtual environments to investigating street 
patterns and exploring abstract data spaces, computer researchers have utilized 
various architectural theories to make the visualization believable and pleasing. 
8.1. 3D GEOMETRIC MODELING 
Creating a believable 3D geometric urban model is essential to an urban 
visualization system. Work by Rossi and Krier both focus on understanding the 
 URBAN VISUALIZATION 7 
relationships between individual pieces of architecture and the city. Depending 
on the building type, space, construction, circulation, and grouping, each piece 
of architecture dictates its surrounding typology. Using Rossi and Krier’s 
theories, neighborhoods can be generated with believable buildings of various 
sizes and shapes. 
The buildings generated based on Rossi and Krier’s approach need to be 
bounded by streets and paths, which can be created using Hillier’s theory of 
space syntax. By examining axial lines, roads can be created such that an equal 
balance of connectivity and integration is maintained throughout the city. 
Alexander’s theory of urban design encompasses elements of an urban 
environment on all scales. The rules that he created regarding “wholeness” can 
be recursively applied from a single building, a district, to an entire city. In 
constructing a 3D model of a city, the recursive nature of Alexander’s theory can 
add meaning to the urban model on all scales such that a minor change to the 
creation of the buildings will appear in all levels of the city. 
8.2. RUN-TIME MODEL SIMPLIFICATION 
A large urban model containing millions of polygons is still difficult to render in 
real time with the latest technologies. For interactive visualization of large urban 
models, run-time model simplification is essential. The principal behind model 
simplification is to reduce the geometric detail on the least important aspects of 
the model. This principal coincides with Sitte’s differentiation between “artistic” 
models from the economic ones. Using Sitte’s theory, the run-time model 
simplification can more aggressively remove details from the economic models 
since they are of less importance to the city. The artistic models should contain 
more geometric detail in most situations as they visually define the general feel 
of the city. 
Lynch’s notion of landmarks serves as a similar guideline to Sitte’s artistic 
models. Since the elements of legibility as described by Lynch are based on 
residents’ mental map of an urban environment, these legibility elements are 
indications of the levels of importance of the architectural pieces within a city. 
The computer application UrbanVis developed by Remco Chang utilizes 
Lynch’s urban legibility elements (Fig. 7). The tool simplifies a large number of 
buildings by using a clustering algorithm based on paths, edges, districts, nodes, 
and landmarks. This simplification technique offers a new way to understand the 
urban environment by maintaining a viewers mental map of the city.   
While Sitte and Lynch’s theories address the geometric importance of urban 
buildings, Cullen’s experiential approach to an urban environment concentrates 
on the preservation of textures of the buildings. Although simplification of 
geometry in a visualization system is important, appropriately removing textures 
can drastically improve the performance of a visualization system. Using 
Cullen’s theory, for as long as the simplification of texture can maintain the 
sense of “IT, HERE, and THERE” (Cullen, 1975), the visualization system can 
remove the redundant details in the textures. 
8 G. WESSEL, E. SAUDA, AND R. CHANG  
 
Figure 7. UrbanVis. The left view displays demographic data of the areas around the focus point. 
The right view shows the clustered building models based on Lynch’s elements of urban legibility. 
8.3. INFOMRATION VIZUALIZATION OVERLAY 
Informative labelling with either text or icons can help orient the user of an 
urban visualization system, but too many labels on the screen becomes cluttered 
or the underlying model is difficult to see. On the other hand, too few labels and 
it becomes difficult for the user to recognize areas of the city. 
Venturi’s study of signs and symbols in Las Vegas can serve as a guideline to 
the appropriate amount of labels used in a visualization system. Buildings with 
noticeable geometry or texture (symbols) do not require the additional labels; 
whereas indistinguishable buildings or groups of buildings can be identified 
through the use of legible labeling. 
Although labeling of individual buildings is relevant, it is often more useful 
to label an entire area within a city. This can be accomplished by either showing 
the name of the area, or by abstractly representing the area using glyphs similar 
to that of Koolhaas’s graphic design language. Furthermore, as the physical 
aspects of architecture begin to integrate with digital technologies, these labels 
of buildings or regions can begin to depict other aspects such as function or use 
as suggested by Allen. 
9.  Future Work  
The Urban Visualization group conducts on-going research on urban legibility 
focused on the city’s spatial structure and its transformation due to technology, 
telecommunications, and networked infrastructures. This investigation of urban 
theories is being extended to include the work of Bill Mitchell, Robert Venturi, 
Christine Boyer, Tarik Fathy, Thomas Sieverts, Stephen Graham, Melvin 
Webber, and Manuel Castells.  
 URBAN VISUALIZATION 9 
Following from the discovery of new urban models, we are working in 
collaboration with the Cognitive Science program at UNC Charlotte to analyze 
urban structures using semantic networks. We are in the process of designing 
experiments to test new theories with human subjects. 
A third initiative aims to produce visualization algorithms based upon urban 
theories that extend the work begun by Chang. Collaborating with the Charlotte 
Visualization Center at UNC Charlotte, we are seeking a computer visualization 
that will implement modern urban theories and visualization techniques. Our 
goal is to enable a user to gain a sense of urban legibility that will include both 
the geometric form as well as the flow of information and goods. 
References 
Alexander, C.: 1964, A Notes on the Synthesis of Form, Harvard University Press, Cambridge. 
Alexander, C., Ishikawa, S. and Silverstein, M.: 1977, A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, 
Construction, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Alexander, C., Neis, H., Anninou, A. and King, I.: 1987, A New Theory of Urban Design, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 
Allen, S.: 1999, Points and Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City, Princeton Architectural 
Press, New York. 
Broadbent, G.: 1990, Emerging Concepts of Urban Space Design, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
London. 
Chang, R., Wessel, G., Kosara, R., Sauda, E. and Ribarsky, W.: 2007, Legible Cities: Focus 
Dependent Multi-resolution Visualization of Urban Relationships, IEEE Transactions on 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6), 1169-1175. 
Chang, R., Butkiewicz, T., Ziemkiewicz, C., Wartell, Z., Pollard, N. and Ribarsky, W.: 2006, 
Hierarchical Simplification of City Models to Maintain Urban Legibility, In Prceedings of the 
SIGGRAPH 2006 Conferences on Sketches & Applications, 130. 
Cullen, G.: 1975, The Concise Townscape, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York. 
Darken, R. and Sibert, J.L.: 1996, Navigating Large Virtual Spaces, International Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction 8(1), 49-72. 
Hakim, B.S.: Feb. 1991 [Review of the book A New Theory of Urban Design]. ACSA: Journal of 
Architectural Education, 44(2), 120-123.  
Hillier, B.: 1996, Space is the Machine, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Hillier, B. and Hanson, J.: 1984, The Social Logic of Space, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Ingram, R. and Benford, S.: 1996, The Application of Legibility Techniques to Enhance 3-D 
Information Visualizations, The Computer Journal, 39(10), 819-836. 
Koolhaas, R., Boeri, S., Kwinter, S. and Tazi, N.: 2000, Mutations: Harvard Project on the City, 
ACTAR, Barcelona. 
Koolhaas, R. and Mau, B.: 1998, S, M, L, XL, The Monacelli Press, New York. 
Krier, R.: 1979, Urban Space, Rizzoli International Publications, Inc., New York. 
Lynch, K.: 1960, The Image of the City, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Rossi, A.: 1982, The Architecture of the City, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Soane, J.: 2007 [Review of the book Mutations: Harvard Project on the City]. 
http://www.ribabookshops.com. 
Tolman, E.C.: 1948, Cognitive Maps in Rats and Man, Psychological Review 55, 189-208. 
Venturi, R., Brown, D.S. and Izenour, S.: 1972, Learning form Las Vegas: The Forgotten 
Symbolism of Architectural Form, MIT Press, Cambridge. 

