An Integrated In-Situ Approach to Impacts from Natural Disasters
on Critical Infrastructures
Online ID 185
Abstract—Natural disasters can have a devastating effect on critical infrastructures, especially in case of cascading effects among
multiple infrastructures such as the electric power grid, the communication network, and the road network. While there exist detailed
models for individual types of infrastructures such as electric power grids, these do not encompass the various interconnections and
interdependencies to other networks. Cascading effects are hard to discover and often the root cause of problems remain unclear.
In order to enable real-time situational awareness for operational risk management one needs to be aware of the broader context
of events. In this paper, we present a unique visual analytics control room system that integrates the separate visualizations of the
different network infrastructures with social media analysis and mobile in-situ analysis to help to monitor the critical infrastructures,
detecting cascading effects, performing root cause analyses, and managing the crisis response. Both the social media analysis and
the mobile in-situ analysis are important components for an effective understanding of the crisis and an efficient crisis response. Our
system provides a mechanism for conjoining the available information of different infrastructures and social media as well as mobile
in-situ analysis in order to provide unified views and analytical tools for monitoring, planning, and decision support. A realistic use
case scenario based on real critical infrastructures as well as our qualitative study with crisis managers shows the potential of our
approach.
Index Terms—power simulation, visual analytics, critical infrastructure, mobile in-situ analytics, homeland security.
1 INTRODUCTION
Responding to the destructive impact of a volatile hurricane to a net-
work of critical infrastructure is the central challenge for emergency
responders. After witnessing the devastating destruction from Hurri-
cane Sandy during 2012 and the flood disaster in Germany 2013 deci-
sion makers are on high-alert for threats to their critical infrastructures
such as power lines, food networks, shelters, etc., potentially caused
by impact from another natural catastrophes. Important backbones
of our society are electrical power networks since the electricity sup-
ply has a strong impact on the fundamental societal structures such as
life/health, environment, and economy. Especially, electric power sys-
tems are increasingly dependent on information and communication
technology (ICT) systems as new monitoring, control, and protection
functions, especially in the currently emerging Smart Grid installa-
tions. In order to deal with the increasing vulnerabilities of electric
power systems, advanced ICTs, including network-based Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems or Wide Area Moni-
toring Systems (WAMS) have been deployed by the power industry.
Analyzing the vast amount of information from different domains
is a complex analytical issue. The monitoring of the interconnections
between power grids and digital networks requires the integration of
several data sources. With an overview the crisis manager is able to
understand and explore the crisis allowing her/him to project the future
development and to make decisions. Situational awareness is impor-
tant on all levels of crisis response that range from central command
centers to site-commanders and boots-on-the-ground. All levels must
be able to access the information of a crisis. Further, they need to
communicate bottom-up or top-down since crisis managers typically
rely on the aggregated information of the field and first responders lack
context information.
Novel public communication platforms like social media services
and other Web 2.0 sources have established a completely new infor-
mation channel that can help to improve situational awareness for the
decision makers. Citizens affected by critical events often report vital
situation related information directly to messaging services like Twit-
ter or Facebook. They use mobile and sometimes even GPS-enabled
communication devices like smartphones or tablet computers. Gather-
ing useful information pieces from the vast amounts of random unre-
Submitted to IEEE VAST 2014. Do not redistribute.
lated chatter poses a completely new challenge for analysis and deci-
sion support systems.
Existing tools and systems do not support the integration of infor-
mation over several critical infrastructures such as power grids and the
ICT networks. The monitoring and understanding of the relationship
of critical infrastructures and the coordinated management of their fail-
ures is therefore one of the biggest challenges in critical infrastruc-
ture protection and crisis response. In this paper, we present a system
that supports all levels of command structures and enables situational
awareness for crisis response. This system was developed within a
nationwide interdisciplinary project [blinded for review] running for
three years with an international research collaboration to a partner
project [blinded for review].
Our contribution: We present a visual analytics system that: 1)
supports all levels of crisis response with specialized equipment and
visualizations for control rooms and mobile devices; 2) combines mul-
tiple critical infrastructures and social media by information abstrac-
tion; 3) enables interactive simulation and visualization of the sub-
sequent development of a crisis; 4) enables interdisciplinary and dis-
tributed teams to understand and react on crisis situations.
2 RELATED WORK
Visual analytics provides technologies that support the decision maker
to gain a precise overview of the current situation by (1) automatically
filtering irrelevant information, (2) presenting relevant data visually
to optimize understanding, (3) optimizing the communication process
among the stakeholders, and (4) supporting the analysts formulate and
assess alternative solutions. Visual analytics fulfills the task to bridge
the gap between several networks, especially in vision of the analy-
sis of cascading effects. The combination of automated data process-
ing and interactive visualization techniques serves as a means to cope
with the complexity of the selected task. For instance, the advantage
of such tools has been illustrated in an analysis of the 2005 outbreak
of the avian flu by combining different analysis capabilities [17]. This
scenario shows the power of an analytic setting that supports the anal-
ysis of complex, real-world scenarios. Also, first visual analytics tools
in the area of crisis response were the result of SoKNOS [9]. This
comprehensive environment requires integrated visual and traditional
systematic analysis of massive data, including improved strategies for
exploratory visual analysis, hypothesis testing and user-specific pre-
sentation of relevant information as a basis for actionable decision
making. Furthermore, visual analytics tools for analyzing syndromic
hotspots are presented by Maciejewski et al. [12] and allow the analyst
to perform real-time hypothesis testing and evaluation.
Much prior research has focused on using simulation and predictive
modeling to anticipate hurricane movement and suggest possible land-
fall and impact locations [23, 16, 19, 5]. The challenge of understand-
ing these modeling efforts and their predictive capabilities from large
collections of sensing and simulation datasets is ubiquitous. However,
for such computation driven practice it is detached from the human-
decision making process. It is important to gain enough insights to
actionable knowledge, but the development of models and analysis of
modeling results usually requires that models be run many times [4].
As part of the PSERC project, techniques are developed to visualize
complex power systems and flows [15]. For the interactive analysis
of network related data sources such as server logs or BGP protocol
data, Fischer et al. developed a visual analytics expert system in [6].
A detailed overview of cyber security and privacy issues in a smart
grid context is presented in [10]. The control room is the central part
of a system, where all information comes together. Notifications and
alarms are collected and transferred to a central node. These events are
typically evaluated by rule-based systems, where the rules are defined
by domain experts. Rooney et al. gives an introduction to Root Cause
Analysis (RCA) in [18]. There are also systems that use simpler fuzzy
logic rules as a vehicle that allows engineers to incorporate human
reasoning in the control algorithm [13].
Social media, such as Twitter and Facebook, contain time-critical
information that can enhance situational awareness. First approaches
for building and improving decision making systems in this domain
were introduced by Tomaszewski et al. [22]. MacEachren et al. [11]
developed a visual analytics tool that allows for querying social media
sources and depicting aggregated results on a geographical map. Thom
et al. [20] present a novel cluster analysis approach to automatically
detect spatiotemporal anomalies in Twitter messages.
Evacuation of large urban structures, such as campus buildings, are-
nas, or stadiums, is of prime interest to emergency responders and
planners. Although there is a large body of work on evacuation al-
gorithms and their application, most of these methods are impractical
to use in real-world scenarios (non real-time, for instance) or have
difficulty handling scenarios with dynamically changing conditions.
Visual analytics involves effectively combining interactive visual dis-
plays with computational transformation, processing, and filtering of
large data [21]. One focus of visual analytics is real-world problems
involving situationally aware decision support. Andrienko et al.[1] de-
scribed the sequence of tasks that are fundamental to exploratory visu-
alization of spatio-temporal data. They incorporate these ideas into ef-
fectively demonstrating the movement of storks across a geographical
area. Campbell and Weaver[3] investigate situational awareness dur-
ing emergencies using two different tools: RimSim Response! (RSR)
and RimSim Visualization (RSV). The work of Kim et al. [8] focused
on the use of mobile devices for situationally aware emergency re-
sponse and training, and thus, their approach is similar to our work.
They demonstrated their system with an evacuation simulation of the
Rhode Island club fire of 2003.
The discussed approaches and systems focus on a specific domain
and do not combine various external data sources. Integrate sensor
data (electricity, weather, supply), social media and in-situ analysis
is a challenging task. Furthermore, most of the current systems are
intended for domain expert users, although crisis management teams
may consist of interdisciplinary members. Enabling interdisciplinary
teams to analyze and understand interdependent data leads to efficient
crisis response.
3 DESIGN FRAMEWORK: TARGET USERS & REQUIREMENTS
Large scale emergency response has a command structure as illus-
trated in Figure 1. A large police or fire response, for example, will
have a site commander who deploys first responders. If the emergency
is larger and more wide-spread, there will be a command center with
oversight over multiple site commanders. A similar structure applies
to breakdown of the electrical grid or other critical infrastructure. The
deeper one goes into the command structure, the more mobile the re-
sponders are; they are focused on the locales, tasks, and decisions at
hand and traditionally don’t have contextual understanding or situa-
tional awareness. Typically, site commanders also don’t have situa-
tional awareness (in terms of the deployment of their personnel and
what they are doing or seeing, for example) nor do they have the con-
text to make the most effective decisions. To make decisions, the first
responder will want to know what is happening in the locale, what is
about to hit where and when. The site commander will want to know
similar things over a wider locale and must in addition organize and
manage a group of responders. Aspects of all this should flow up to
the command center for overall decision-making.
Networked mobile visual analytics can be an essential part of this
contextual and situational awareness. When we have developed and
deployed networked mobiles systems for emergency response in ur-
ban areas, worn or carried by first responders, police and emergency
managers have immediately seen the power and usefulness of such
systems. It is in this spirit that we have developed the networked mo-
bile visual analytics interface as part of crisis response. It connects the
responders with the command center so that everyone resides in the
same context. However, even if they lose the network connection, they
can carry enough of the context on their mobile devices and can take
effective action. Further, any feedback and updates they provide will
be transmitted to the central system. Detailed location, movement, and
action updates can be placed in the appropriate spatio-temporal context
so that commanders can see, in unprecedented detail and without am-
biguity, what is going on (and responders can see, minute-by-minute
where there fellow responders are and what they are doing). Specifi-
cally, our system is designed to accommodate the three essential per-
sonnel in a crisis respond scenario:
Fig. 1. Overview of the Users that our system is designed to facilitate.
Crisis Manger: Crisis Managers are a group of domain experts
who oversees the entire emergence response process. This group is
typically formed by interdisciplinary members from various analytical
domains, such as grid operators from power companies, city-state offi-
cials, evacuation experts, and people from federal departments. Their
objective is to understand and assess the severity of the crisis situ-
ation, select corresponding Site-Commanders with appropriate First
Responders, and provide Just-In-Time decisions making based on in-
puts from social media and in-field communications. The natural of
the heterogeneous data inputs for the Crisis Managers determined that
they will benefit from a control room setup, where they will be pro-
vided with a combined overview of the crisis situation. As detailed
in section 5, our setup supports distributed as well as collaborative
analysis, provides overviews of the development of the ongoing cri-
sis, and it further enables the Crisis Managers to interactively deploy
and arrange response effort, and receive the communications from site
commanders and real-time situation updates.
Site Commanders: With the advanced mobile technology (e.g.,
mobile emergency response vehicles), site managers are the critical
link between Crisis-Manager at control center and First Responders in
Fig. 2. Overview of the power, mobile, and road grid. Transformer stations (rectangles) are connected via power lines and are also connected to the
communication infrastructure (triangles), which transfers the information to the central control room. The transmission range of the mobile stations
is visualized as concentric circles. While gray indicates normal operation mode, the yellow elements on the screen reveal a severe situation. High
deviations in voltage cascaded from the energy grid into the mobile grid due to failures of the power supply. Now, the operator must intervene
immediately. With malfunctions in the mobile grid, the crisis response commands from the control room won’t reach the field, which then would
result in a black out. Further, roads are blocked and hinder the response team to reach the target area, which is visible in the command center after
the first responders update the street status. The dynamic routing adapts to these constraints and calculates a different route.
the field. Based on our previous collaboration with local emergency
responders, Site Commander (e.g., Police Chief) are often stationed
near the crisis center where first responders were deployed to conduct
on-site instructions and in-situ communications. At the mean time,
they are relying on the mobility of the technologies to maintain an
open communication channel with control center for further situation
assessment and updates. Site Commanders act differently from Crisis
Managers in a way that they have a more focused missions in a spe-
cific area that is assigned to them (e.g., a specific substation or a street
blocks) and are in charge of provide real-time response as the crisis
unfolds in the field.
First Responders: First Responders are the group that fights the
diseases right in the center of where crisis occurs. These teams consist
of various professionals, such as policeman, fire fighter, and power
grid responders. These interdisciplinary group mainly conduct re-
sponse effort in the field with instructions from Site Commanders.
Their extreme needs of mobility determined that we need to provide
them with a mobile-device based visual analytics system. Key func-
tions in this system, as detailed in section 4.4, includes instructions that
informs them about the areas that they need to focus their attentions,
interactive methods to depict areas to prioritize their tasks, and finally
communication methods to provide updates and situation reports to
their Site Managers. All this information need to be shared through
wireless networks that directly feedback to the Site Commanders and
further to Crisis Managers.
4 SYSTEM COMPONENTS
4.1 Simulation of Critical Infrastructures
Large scale natural disaster, a cyber-attack, or other wide spread crisis
may affect multiple infrastructures. To capture these complex, multi-
farious, and dynamic effects, we utilize a simulation model [blinded
for review] that takes into account the interrelationships among criti-
cal infrastructures. The simulation is built within a rule-based frame-
work for integrating multiple infrastructure components at a high level.
The interlaced critical infrastructures are captures in a set of networks
with each node having a set of properties according to its category
and the edges providing a dependency rule according to the cate-
gory and state of the two connected nodes. This results in a depen-
dency/interdependency ontology (e.g., as illustrated in Figure 2(a) mo-
bile transmitters are connected to transformer stations). Thus, for ex-
ample, a breakdown of a power substation would immediately cascade
to power loss at points on its distribution network. If a school were a
node in the distribution network, it would be switched to backup power
that, after a given time, would also shut down. Likewise, telecommuni-
cation nodes would switch to backup power that might also shut down
after its prescribed duration. Thus, the simulation also takes cascading
events into account.
In some natural catastrophes some roads may be affected and res-
cue or response teams, especially with heavy gear, are not able to pass
them. This has to be considered in the evacuation and logistic man-
agement at all three levels: E.g., the crisis managers must plan the
logistics of gear and troops; the site-commander sends in first respon-
ders on different routes to the crisis and first responders will update
the status of streets if they are not passable. Our system supports dy-
namic routing with the state-of-the-art algorithms such as Dijkstra’s
algorithm that consider to the current status of streets.
4.2 Visualization of Interdependent Infrastructures
A smart grid (energy network) typically consists of power lines at dif-
ferent voltage levels connected by transformer stations. These sta-
tions distribute the power over regions and supply streets, households,
and industrial facilities. In our scenario, a mobile communication grid
transfers information and control commands from the central control
room to the electrical grid. The mobile transmitters itself are power-
supplied by common transformer stations and thus, the infrastructures
are tightly interconnected.
4.2.1 Information Abstraction & Visual Encoding
The complex and vast amount of information of each infrastructure is
abstracted and reduced. This enables the decision maker to understand
the full crisis in its context and to detect potential cascading effects.
Every infrastructure is abstracted to an undirected graph. Its nodes
are represented by symbols, such as rectangles for transformer sta-
tions and triangles for mobile transmission stations. The graph edges
represent the domain dependent connection between infrastructure el-
ements, such as power lines and mobile communication connections
(see Figure 3(b) and Figure 2).
The status of each element is estimated by a state-evaluator model
that is defined for each infrastructure. These models concern the actual
information of the field, such as utilization and durability (see Figure
3(a)). We use a prediction module for our power grid that predicts
the consumption and production at each transformer station accord-
ing to weather forecasts and past data based on Monte Carlo simula-
Fig. 3. (a) Station state evaluators consider the incoming measurements and the comparison to the expected behavior, which reveals anomalies.
A set of rules maps this input to color that expresses the status of the element. (b) Domain details are added to the symbols such as power
consumption and production (red and blue bars), as well as producer types (photovoltaic or biogas) for transformer stations.
tion. This information is sent to the simulation server that simulates
the subsequent development. This “expected” behavior is compared
to the actual measurements. Thus, anomalies are detected, which may
reveal damaged or harmed devices. Further, the subsequent develop-
ment can be visualized as small multiples (see Figure 4) in addition to
the monitoring views (see Figure 2).
Fig. 4. Subsequent Development: If there is any emerging problem in
the future, the prediction view will show the future status of the network
by small multiples, which highlights the remaining time and the elements
that are affected.
A set of rules maps the input of the field and anomaly detector to
color. Saturated and intense yellow, red, and violet represent warnings
and alarms. Less saturated colors stand for less serious events, such as
gray for normal (uninteresting) status. Some rules provide continues
values in addition to ordinal signals. For these rules we use a contin-
uous color scale that varies over saturation and lightness from gray to
yellow and over hue from yellow to red. Thus, severe events are per-
ceptually highlighted on the dark background whereas less important
events do have less visual impact [24]. The size of elements represents
the topological importance of infrastructure elements. We consider
central elements (and their dependencies) more important, since their
failures are more acute than failures of border elements. Thus, the size
of important elements is increased, which also highlights dangers or
failures of central elements. We also add domain details into the sym-
bols such as the current power production and consumption as well as
the producer type for transformer stations (see Figure 3(b)).
4.2.2 Zoom, Focus & Details on Demand
Two major problems arise when graphs are visualized: the over plot-
ting of nodes and intersection of edges. The over plotting of nodes
can be compensated by stacking the overlapping nodes and visualiz-
ing them at their average location. They are sorted by their current
status. The domain details (e.g., power consumption and producer
type) are aggregated and visualized in the foreground element. For
the intersection of mobile communications, we omit the painting of
connections that are working properly and use edge bundling in or-
der to avoid intersections. These aggregation techniques enhance the
readability of the visualization, however, at the cost of hiding or divert
some information. The user is therefore able to zoom into areas of
interest. If enough space is available, the system will visualize the el-
ements in their normal layout and will provide additional information
(see Figure 5).
Fig. 5. Semantic zooming reveals more details on each zoom level as
soon as enough space is available.
The user can further interact with the field via control panels, e.g.,
disabling powerlines or deactivating producers at a transformer sta-
tion (see Figure 6). The user is further enabled to adjust the expected
production and consumption for simulating alternatives and thus, can
create several alternatives for decision making.
4.3 Accessing Human Sensor Information
With the rise of community driven content services, such as Twit-
ter and Facebook, a new information channel for situation awareness
has been established in the Web. In contrast to more traditional data
sources, like structured sensor data or detailed reports from emergency
responders, these new information channels pose novel requirements
Fig. 6. Control panels visualize the actual measurement data (a). (b)
Controls enable the operator to switch elements on and off. With (c) the
operator can simulate or control the amount of energy consumption and
production at a transformer station. (d) Charts visualize the develop-
ment over the past hour / day.
for data filtering, ranking and aggregation. The relevant information
has to be separated from general chatter and organized according to
different topic categories. Large amounts of repetitive reports have to
be integrated into a consistent and scalable situation overview. In our
approach we propose novel methods to address these challenges in or-
der to incorporate social media services as external community driven
sensors within the command center environment.
4.3.1 Overview and exploration based on automated event
identification
The complexity of events and the velocity of streaming data often
hinders straightforward situation awareness during critical situations.
Means for automated detection and display of possibly relevant clues
can be a key factor in successfully mastering crisis management. In
case of social media data, it is particularly important to detect possible
first-hand accounts (e.g. eyewitness information) of on-going situa-
tion between large quantities of irrelevant information and to provide
visual representations of the discussed topics and observations.
As in [20], we rely on the presumption that messages addressing
local events are often of related content and structure and that they
are furthermore located in a spatial and temporal neighborhood. This
ultimately leads to spatiotemporal clusters of messages reporting on
the same situation related topics and keywords. Based on a cluster
analysis approach, adapted to the specifics of real-time data, we auto-
matically detect such spatiotemporal anomalies in the continuous data
stream. Once a timeframe and geographic region is interactively se-
lected by the analyst, the system generates a map of detected anoma-
lies within that region and timeframe by finding frequent keywords
in the message clusters and place them as labels at the corresponding
cluster locations on the map. In order to avoid overlapping labels and
at the same time show the analyst as much information as possible, we
apply a collision avoidance technique that allows overlapping labels to
move small distances from their designated locations. Ultimately, the
label is not shown on the selected zoom level, if a certain maximum
distance for that zoom level has been exceeded.
Our technique provides a broad overview of all events that occur
in a given geographic region and, more importantly, an indication of
keywords and topics that might be a good starting point for further
investigations (see Figure 8). This is particularly helpful if the analyst
does not know in advance what to search for or to initially inform
him of an unknown ongoing situation. By zooming into the map, our
layout technique automatically provides more labels for the given area,
as more screen space becomes available for the given region. The
analyst thus receives more detailed indication of possible sub-events
connected to a larger event and can use this as a basis to extend his
investigation with traditional textual search, content analysis and focus
and context visualizations.
Fig. 7. SVM classifiers are trained based on existing social media data
to enable detection of messages related to specific information needs.
A visual tool supports the analyst by exploring the content and meta-
data of historic messages in order to find good training samples. The
SVM classifier is trained by selecting and labeling sets of positive and
negative samples. The outcome and performance of the classifier and
the progress of the training are continuously visualized on the map and
associated statistics. Bottom: Classification and filtering of crisis related
messages. Based on his specific information needs the analyst can load
and combine modules from a library of the pre-trained classifiers using
set operations. The occurrence of all new messages is shown in real-
time. The analyst can associate the modules in the filter combination
with specific labels, colors and symbols that are then used to display
messages detected by that module
4.3.2 Detection of highly relevant information items based on
user-steered classification
Besides the need to be informed about unknown or unexpected events,
analysts usually also have a distinct domain and area of responsibility
and are thus able to define information types that are clearly relevant
to their tasks. For example, police officers will always be interested in
information about the use of firearms or other acts of violence in their
precinct. However, plain keyword-based approaches to find messages
fitting to the given information need are often not powerful enough, as
the complexity and specifics of language use in social media data can
often not be properly reflected.
Especially in real-time analysis scenarios analysts need means to
quickly build highly customized filters based on their information
needs, their knowledge structure and the specifics of the situation. In
our approach we propose a two-step process where a library of Support
Vector Machine (SVM) classifiers customized to the specific informa-
tion needs is trained first, which can then be adjusted and combined
with each other and with more simple keyword-, spatial, temporal-,
spam- and other filters based on interactive visual set operations (see
Figure 7). This idea has already been introduced in [2].
Fig. 8. Overview visualization of crisis related topics based on automated anomaly identification. The image shows the social media component
with activated anomaly visualization during a large earthquake that happened in August 2011 near Washington DC. The observation of earthquake
related events lead to several larger ”earthquake”-clusters in many cities along the east coast. Zooming into the map shows more tags in the
respective area and also reveals smaller sub-events that were connected to the larger event. For example, several buildings in Washington were
evacuated which resulted in the prominent topics ”building” and ”evacuate” in the area. Also, the Washington monument experienced damage from
the vibrations, which was also observed and reported by several eyewitnesses, leading to the topics ”monument” and ”damaged” being shown on
the map.
4.3.3 Classifier Training
Based on historic data of previous, well understood events, an ana-
lyst can explore social media messages to label positive and negative
examples for a given event type. This is supported by a range of ex-
ploration and analysis tools. First, the analyst can use an integrated
textual search engine in order to establish an initial exploration context
of social media messages related to the event type. E.g., the analyst
can use keywords like “power”, “outage”, “breakdown”, “damage”,
etc. within a recorded dataset where a known larger crisis like a storm
or earthquake has happened. Next, the analyst can use an exploration
lens, a movable focus and context tool, which shows the most promi-
nent terms in the region underneath it, in order to find hotspots of the
given event. Once the analyst has identified a sufficiently large set
of example messages related (positive) and unrelated (negative) to the
event type, the analyst can label them as such to iteratively progress the
semi-automated training process. The training examples are especially
useful if they are near the SVM-classifiers decision border, i.e. they
have a high probability of being relevant to the topic in terms of key-
words, and just the specific combination of terms renders them related
or unrelated (e.g. “This morning the power went down.” vs. “This
morning I have no power to get out of bed”). In contrast to traditional
active learning approaches, the progress of the training is constantly
presented to the analyst by color coding of all messages and by visual-
izing the decision boundary in a spatial representation. By iteratively
exploring and investigating the message set based on these visualiza-
tions the analyst can understand the effects of his training and assess
the current performance of the classifier.
4.3.4 Real-Time Monitoring
With repeated classifier training analysts can create a comprehensive
library of annotated classifier modules for different event and message
types relevant to their domain. In a real-time analysis scenario they
would usually load and configure a range of classifiers and filters at
the beginning of the monitoring period. The classifier modules are ar-
ranged in a graph visualization and can be combined with each other
and with ad-hoc defined keyword, spatiotemporal- and general pur-
pose spam-filters using Boolean operations (AND, OR, Sym. Diff.,
etc.). Furthermore they can be modified by increasing the precision or
recall of the detection using interactive controls and the most relevant
classifiers can be tagged with custom selected colors and symbols in
order to highlight corresponding messages if they have been detected.
If an unusual situation unfolds, the analyst can also apply the filter-
and classifier management to reflect and validate quantitative hypoth-
esis using message volume indicators provided for each module.
4.4 High Mobility Visualizations & Visual Communication
Fig. 9. Overview Mobile Concept for First Responders.
Mobility for the First Responder is a crucial aspect in their field of
work. The absolute necessity of providing mobile system to campus
police and first responders was observed during previous evacuation
exercises [7]. First Responders are no longer satisfied with office-
based work stations, but are demanding interactive mobile analysis
techniques to carry out in the field. This doesn’t strictly refer to mobile
devices, but includes movable equipments in general.
Therefore, we designed a network visual analytics system that uti-
lizes the advancement of mobile devices (e.g., iPad). Our mobile in-
terface aims to provide an interactive environment where the First Re-
sponders would be able to receive detailed information in addition to
commands from Site Commanders and Crisis Managers, examine the
crisis scenario around them, conduct search and research with clear
routine information, and finally provide feedback information to the
Fig. 10. Our control room setup consists of three high resolution dis-
plays for the visualizations and a touch table for the steering of clients.
At any time it is possible to add further clients.
managers. They have access to the visualizations and information of
the command center, which can be focused to their particular location
and interest. Section 5 discusses details of our implemented architec-
ture to support these functions.
To help users quickly select and focus on a geospatial region, we
developed probing gestures, as shown in Figure 9 (B). This is an ex-
tremely important analysis feature because it allows the user to drive
the analysis and focus on what is important to their needs on the go.
A First Responder can, with their touch enabled glove, directly draw
onto the map with his or her finger by drawing a bounding area around
a region or mark specific points. The system samples the gestures and
computes the convex hull or straight line with linear regression, if de-
manded. Thus, rapid and noisy drawings are smoothed (see Figure
9(c)). They can further annotate in the selections with real-time up-
dates, as shown in Figure 9 (c), and share the information back to their
commanders and other responders, through a fast wireless or satellite
connection.
5 CONTROL ROOM
The different components are combined in a control room setup that
synchronizes all views and clients on demand and allows the integra-
tion of mobile devices.
5.1 Concepts
Crisis managers, often consist of several experts from different do-
mains. A common way to analyze crisis scenarios is the subsequent
analysis of incidents. Typically infrastructures build large graphs and
therefore, it is not possible to limit the analysis to a single screen.
Hence, we setup a control room (see Figure 9) that supports a dis-
tributed and collaborative analysis among several experts. Our setup
consists of three high-resolution displays and one touch table.
We see four advantages in this setup: First, single experts use this
setup to explore and explain incidents with the aid of different views
and visualizations on the crisis scenario as illustrated in Figure 2; these
are displayed on the three high resolution displays. Second, the setup
can be used to illustrate alternative solutions for decision making:
Multiple alternatives and their subsequent development can be visual-
ized simultaneously, which supports experts to draw decisions. Third,
if several experts synchronously use this setup, the work can be parti-
tioned on the three displays as well as on the touch table. Every expert
receives his own interaction device, for instance a cordless air mouse,
which is applied to his own workspace. In case an expert needs to ex-
change information or enhance visualizations, we offer the possibility
to synchronize the clients. Fourth, this setup easily enables a possi-
ble combination of the previously named social media component and
critical infrastructures.
Fig. 11. Client-server architecture for the synchronization of different
views and simulations results on multiple clients.
5.2 Architecture
In order to enable this vision of a distributed and collaborative environ-
ment, there is need for a supportive system architecture. In a collab-
orative working environment, multiple views and information have to
be synchronized. We therefore set up a client-server architecture that
supports synchronization across different clients. Our central server
manages all connections to the clients and distributes information. Ev-
ery interaction that needs to be synchronized is first sent to the server.
However, the clients do not necessarily need to be synchronized and
can also work independently if requested. In addition, the server also
handles all connections to the external simulation servers and the local
data sources (power grid, mobile grid, weather, and geography). The
system requirements include hardware and system independence. In
this distributed environment every client running a JAVA VM is able
to connect to the server.
Protocols: The communication is established by web sockets and
REST interfaces. The web sockets are permanent connections via TCP
protocol, whereas the REST-services are based on explicit HTTP re-
quests. Each client contains multiple sockets that will inform the client
if some parameters, views or synchronization are changed. In this case
the clients uses the REST interfaces to request explicit updates from
the server. If a user requests different configurations or sends informa-
tion, the client uses the REST interfaces to update the server, which
then will update other clients if necessary. This keeps all connected
clients synchronized and minimizes the traffic to and from the server,
since only packages that are currently needed in the particular view of
the client are transmitted.
Mobile Devices: Although overall function goals are straightfor-
ward, creating a way to visualize large amounts of infrastructure events
while also providing interactive analytics is still a complex challenge.
Largely this challenge is due to the number of infrastructure elements
we need to consider versus the inherent hardware limitations of mobile
devices. To accommodate the essential functions, our mobile design is
heavily built around network optimization and scalability. We utilize
a low-level graphics engine specifically built for rendering the graphs
and provide interactive selection and drawing. It enables the device to
render vast data sets very quickly. The graphics engine uses a scene
graph style data structure for storing elements. It also utilizes graph-
ics techniques like double buffering and constructing texture atlases
on the fly for improved rendering. In addition, we utilize the multi-
core architecture built in the modern mobile devices to maximize its
computing power. We utilize parallelism for all our REST requests to
create asynchronous data pulls. We also load all data from the CPU to
the GPU through a background processes. We purposely leave the user
interface to its own separate process in order to not lock that thread.
While mobile OS incorporates mapping services, they are not
specifically designed for displaying large data sets or any complex 2D
drawing. Our customized tile map system, as shown in Figure 9 (A),
bears the similarity with commercial mapping system, but also provide
additional functionalities that fits our visual analytics needs. Since the
map tiles are stored in the cloud and the visualization components are
implemented as layers that can be stacked onto the map, our mobile
interface remain lightweight. This approach also enables a smooth
Fig. 12. (a) The north-eastern part is flooded, which results in partial blackout (violet stations) and endangered power grid. The first responders
update the in-situ information about flooded areas and casualties (“Gefahr! U¨berflutung!”, “Verletzte”). (b) The social media analysis early reveals
messages about high water levels (“hochwasser”) and detects destruction events in real time.
transition of updates from Control Room to First Responders in near
real time.
Hardware issues: We further support devices that are too weak
to render our applications. Depending on their hardware, clients are
classified into complete or minimal clients. Complete clients contain
enough resources for standalone applications that renders the com-
ponents by themselves. Therefore, the server needs to transfer data
and information, used for synchronization, to these clients. Minimal
clients do not have enough resources for the whole application and
therefore, the server pre-renders the current view of the client accord-
ing to the device, which is then send and visualized as image. Basic
controls are also available in the minimal clients such that the image
contains the location and type of controls. Thus, minimal clients are
not updated in real time, however, they have access to the full crisis
scenario.
6 SCENARIOS
Three scenarios were designed to highlight the need for such systems.
Therefore, we designed multiple catastrophes that affect critical in-
frastructures, such as a mass disease, a cyber attack, as well as a flood-
scenario that is presented here. The flood disaster is caused by heavy
rain and thunderstorms in a region of Germany. The region was al-
ready flooded in 1987 and the scenario is inspired from these events.
The region is employed with a (model) smart grid by one of the project
partners.
The scenario starts with heavy rain and thunderstorms. Especially
the high grounds of the scenario region are soaked and the soil already
begins to be unstable. A thunderstorm in the early morning hours
increased the danger for this area, which alarms the command center
and site-commanders of the power grid domain. Due to the social
media analysis, which detected messages about unusual water levels,
the site-commander sends a power grid technician (first responder) to
the region for on-site information. Figure 12 b) shows the detected
messages of amblers about high water levels (“hochwasser”). Also
the command center reacts with alarming the regional response teams;
in this case regional fire-fighters that are equipped with specialized
mobile analysis devices.
A debris avalanche hits a small village in the suburban region.
Many homes are flooded and separated from the center of the region.
The debris avalanche also hits a bridge and the flood is jammed. Trans-
former stations in the eastern parts are immediately destroyed and the
blackout cascades from the east to the south (violet stations). The
remaining power circuit in the west and north is suffering from this
immediate loss of consumption, which raises the voltage levels (see
yellow stations in Figure 12). The fire-fighters cannot reach the casu-
alties since streets and fields are not passable. They update the flood-
endangered areas and the status of streets and casualties (see Figure
12 (a): “Gefahr! U¨berflutung!”, “Verletzte”). They request the con-
text information, which is enriched by the technician who supports
additional information from his location. Both teams update the in-
formation, which is synchronized between their clients and the central
control room. The endangered areas and evacuation routes are coor-
dinated by the command center and send to site-commanders and first
responders. The fire-fighters begin to evacuate people to the south.
The water level still raises and reaches over the bridge. The endan-
gered area where one team of fire-fighters is located is flooded. Evac-
uation routes and endangered areas are dynamically updated by first
responders and command center. Also the whole region is now suffer-
ing under a regional blackout since the central transformer station is
hit. The response teams need to inform the civilians about evacuation
routes.
After the situation stabilizes, the power grid site-commander and
the technician coordinate how to ensure that most of the region can be
power supplied. Therefore, the technician updates the status of trans-
former stations and informs the site-commander, which station can be
switched on. Further, the repair and response teams need to organize,
which streets and transformer stations have to be repaired. Updating
the on-site information to the command center and site-commanders
enables their situational awareness and allows directing forces where
they are needed. They can consider local incidents in their decision
making, which would be ineffective without our system.
7 QUALITATIVE EVALUATION
Field studies for crisis management systems are hard to conduct. Re-
alistic crisis data is often not available or classified. Therefore, the
project partners decided to simulate realistic scenarios, which are then
analyzed by target users with our system. We conducted a qualitative
study based on expert feedback rounds and interviews. The first eval-
uation round was a main objective in the project and was conducted
within ten staff months. The process and results are discussed in the
following.
7.1 Process
Evaluation Teams: We formed four teams within the nationwide
interdisciplinary project (blinded for review): 1) Data team consists
of two members of the Federal Office of Civil Protection and Disas-
ter Assistance of Germany (henceforth, BBK), as well as four repre-
sentatives of power suppliers, and further two simulation experts for
smart grid technology and social media. They designed the scenarios
mentioned in the section above and provided the data. 2) The visual
design team (represented by the authors) consists of eight visual an-
alytics experts who designed the system based on the scenarios and
data. 3) An interview team of two persons with backgrounds in visual
design conducted the qualitative interviews with domain experts. 4)
An external experts team consisting of two members of the BBK with
experience in crisis response and ten power grid operators of different
regional power grids in Germany. We selected these different but re-
lated domains since they can be considered as the future target users.
The crisis managers are part of the command center level, whereas the
operators can be considered as site-commanders that are focusing on
one particular region and domain affected by the crisis.
Interviews: The interview team was involved in the creation of
the scenarios but not in the design process and is therefore considered
independent of the design decisions. However, this team was trained
by the design team on the system components and supported with doc-
umentations. Further, they prepared questionnaires for the qualitative
interviews. The interview team visited seven control rooms of regional
power grid suppliers in Germany and also interviewed experienced cri-
sis managers of the BBK. This expert team did not know the system
and scenarios. The interviews were conducted in concrete steps: First,
the interview team presented the single components of the system. Af-
ter the experts were familiar with the system the interview team pre-
sented one scenario as a use case. The scenario was stopped at critical
events and the experts were asked to analyze the crisis and to draw
decisions with the help of the system. Then interviews according to
the questionnaires were conducted. The interview team analyzed the
results and summarized the findings, which were reported back to the
design team, who carefully analyzed the findings and improved the
system for a second iteration, which is still future work.
7.2 Results & Discussion
We found two major facts in the interviews with the target users:
1) Domain experts reported that such systems are needed
for crisis response: The experts reported that there is an urge for
information of the crisis site, because in most cases the command cen-
ters are blind and wait for phone calls to update their status: “The
social media analysis is great. In most cases, first responders are too
busy to update the crisis center. Direct access to Twitter messages that
are linked to the crisis would give us a clearer and faster overview of
the crisis.”, “We want a direct visual communication with first respon-
ders”. We found that they are not only interested in the information of
first responders about the crisis but also how the affected civilians are
describing their status: “Some people may just feel to be forgotten by
the government and we could respond with sending in some teams to
show our presence”. Further, we found that first responders do have an
urge for the context and development of the crisis, because they do not
know what may hit them within the next minutes. They highlighted
that in-situ and social media analysis can improve to narrow down
root causes on-site and also to effectively steer first responders:“The
control center does not even know, which transformer station can be
reached by repair teams. We would need information about the status
of streets and areas around stations. If we could use these tools to-
day, we could directly send the teams where they really could make a
difference”. The interview team found that the tools were efficiently
understood by the expert team, however, they highlighted that a target
user of such systems would require a significant amount of training.
They conclude that the concepts of our system are sound, however,
will require further investigations to integrate this in future crisis re-
sponse centers.
2) Crisis-Managers and Site-Commanders disagreed on the
level of detail: All experts agreed that social media and linked com-
munication with first responders is important and that our system could
be used in crisis scenarios. We found that power grid operators and cri-
sis managers disagreed on the level of details of such visualizations.
The crisis managers wanted to perceive the crisis and simulate differ-
ent alternatives in abstract manner. Thus, they were satisfied with our
components. However, the power grid operators requested more do-
main details and domain standards in the overviews. They reported
that the whole system is interesting, however, the visualizations do not
meet the requirements of power grid monitoring. We conclude that vi-
sualizations have to adapt to the level of command structure and may
be adapted to special domains.
7.3 Discussion, Limitations & Future Work
We found that the target users were convinced of the system and its ap-
plicability. However, we see that the system does not fulfill all require-
ments to be an operational system for power grid control. In these do-
mains, research has evolved over decades to develop customized solu-
tions for this particular infrastructure. Interestingly, the operators that
were involved in the flood disaster that hit Germany in 2013 said that
they were almost blind after the water destroyed the first transformer
stations. Therefore, they highlighted an urge for on-site information
and social media analysis. In the future scenario of interconnected
infrastructures such as smart grid technology, we see a higher com-
plexity as in todays power grids. Command centers must overlook and
perceive the full context of a crisis. Therefore, abstract visualizations
are needed, which was approved by our crisis managers. We argue that
our system exemplifies a means for future central crisis managements
to integrate different critical infrastructures, social media and in-situ
analysis. It will however be interesting to discover the correct level of
detail to satisfy each role in the command structure. For this, we plan
to conduct direct user assessments to improve our components to the
needs of particular site-commanders.
Our scenarios are limited to the available resources within the
project and thus, to the region that is employed with a smart grid. This
might cause that our scenarios overlook large scale effects. Further, in
our study the effects of time pressure was not considered, which may
have significant influence on decision makers.
Another issue is security. The architecture might be vulnerable
although we encrypt the communication between clients and server.
Further, the issue of infeeding wrong information with, for example,
a stolen device or misleading Twitter messages was raised in our in-
terviews. Therefore, we see an urge to include security protocols into
this architecture.
8 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we present a visual analytics system that combines mul-
tiple critical infrastructures, social media and in-situ analysis to sup-
port the different levels of command structure in crisis response. We
present specialized equipment and visualizations for control rooms
and mobile devices. Further, we discuss means for interactive simula-
tion and visualization of the subsequent development of a crisis. This
enables an interdisciplinary and distributed teams to understand and
respond to crisis situations. Our system was applied in realistic sce-
narios and presented to real crisis managers, who conclude that there
is an urge for such systems for crisis response.
REFERENCES
[1] N. V. Andrienko and G. L. Andrienko. A visual analytics framework for
spatio-temporal analysis and modelling. Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, 27(1):55–83, 2013.
[2] H. Bosch, D. Thom, F. Heimerl, E. Puttmann, S. Koch, R. Kruger,
M. Worner, and T. Ertl. ScatterBlogs2: real-time monitoring of microblog
messages through user-guided filtering. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2022–2031, 2013.
[3] B. Campbell and C. Weaver. Rimsim response hospital evacuation: Im-
proving situation awareness and insight through serious games play and
analysis. IJISCRAM, (3):1–15.
[4] J. Dietrich, C. Trahan, M. Howard, J. Fleming, R. Weaver, S. Tanaka,
L. Yu, R. L. Jr., C.N, J. Dawson, Westerink, G. Wells, A. Lu, K. Vega,
A. Kubach, K. Dresback, R. Kolar, C. Kaiser, and R. Twilley. Surface
trajectories of oil transport along the northern coastline of the gulf of
mexico. In Continental Shelf Research, 2012.
[5] H. Edelsbrunner and E. P. Mu¨cke. Simulation of simplicity: A technique
to cope with degenerate cases in geometric algorithms. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics, 9:66–104, 1990.
[6] F. Fischer, J. Fuchs, P.-A. Vervier, F. Mansmann, and O. Thonnard. Vis-
Tracer: a visual analytics tool to investigate routing anomalies in tracer-
outes. pages 80–87. ACM, 2012.
[7] J. Guest, T. Eaglin, K. Subramanian, and W. Ribarsky. Visual analysis of
situationally aware building evacuations, 2013.
[8] S. Kim, Y. Jang, A. Mellema, D. Ebert, and T. Collins. Visual analytics
on mobile devices for emergency response. In Visual Analytics Science
and Technology, 2007. VAST 2007. IEEE Symposium on, pages 35–42,
Oct 2007.
[9] J. Kohlhammer, T. May, and M. Hoffmann. Visual analytics for the strate-
gic decision making process. In GeoSpatial Visual Analytics, pages 299–
310. Springer, 2009.
[10] J. Liu, Y. Xiao, S. Li, W. Liang, and C. L. Chen. Cyber security and
privacy issues in smart grids. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
14(4):981–997, 2012.
[11] A. M. MacEachren, A. Jaiswal, A. C. Robinson, S. Pezanowski, A. Save-
lyev, P. Mitra, X. Zhang, and J. Blanford. Senseplace2: Geotwitter ana-
lytics support for situational awareness. pages 181–190. IEEE, 2011.
[12] R. Maciejewski, S. Rudolph, R. Hafen, A. Abusalah, M. Yakout, M. Ouz-
zani, W. S. Cleveland, S. J. Grannis, M. Wade, and D. S. Ebert. Under-
standing syndromic hotspots-a visual analytics approach. pages 35–42.
IEEE, 2008.
[13] A. B. Marques, G. N. Taranto, and D. M. Falco. A knowledge-based sys-
tem for supervision and control of regional voltage profile and security.
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 20(1):400–407, 2005.
[14] S. Mittelsta¨dt, D. Spretke, D. Sacha, D. A. Keim, B. Heyder, and J. Kopp.
Visual analytics for critical infrastructures. pages 1–8. VDE, 2013.
[15] T. J. Overbye and J. D. Weber. New methods for the visualization of
electric power system information. pages 131–16c. IEEE, 2000.
[16] V. Pascucci, D. E. Laney, R. Frank, G. Scorzelli, L. Linsen, B. Hamann,
and F. Gygi. Real-time monitoring of large scientific simulations. In
Proceedings of the 18-th annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing,
pages 194–198, Melbourne, Florida, March 2003.
[17] P. Proulx, S. Tandon, A. Bodnar, D. Schroh, R. Harper, and W. Wright.
Avian flu case study with nSpace and GeoTime. pages 27–34. IEEE,
2006.
[18] J. J. Rooney and L. N. V. Heuvel. Root cause analysis for beginners.
Quality progress, 37(7):45–56, 2004.
[19] E. Santos, J. Freire, C. Silva, A. Khan, J. Tierny, B. Grimm, L. Lins,
V. Pascucci, S. A. Klasky”, R. D. Barreto, and N. Podhorszki. Enabling
advanced visualization tools in a simulation monitoring system. In Pro-
ceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on e-Science, pages
358–365. IEEE, December 2009.
[20] D. Thom, H. Bosch, S. Koch, M. Worner, and T. Ertl. Spatiotempo-
ral anomaly detection through visual analysis of geolocated twitter mes-
sages. pages 41–48. IEEE, 2012.
[21] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The R&D Agenda
for Visual Analytics. IEEE Press, 2005.
[22] B. M. Tomaszewski, A. C. Robinson, C. Weaver, M. Stryker, and A. M.
MacEachren. Geovisual analytics and crisis management. pages 173–
179. Delft, the Netherlands, 2007.
[23] L. Vincent and P. Soille. Watersheds in digital spaces: An efficient algo-
rithm based on immersion simulations. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., 13(6):583–598, 1991.
[24] L. Wang, J. Giesen, K. T. McDonnell, P. Zolliker, and K. Mueller. Color
design for illustrative visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1739–1754, 2008.

