Implied Dynamics in Information Visualization
Caroline Ziemkiewicz
UNC Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd
Charlotte, NC 28262
caziemki@uncc.edu
Robert Kosara
UNC Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd
Charlotte, NC 28262
rkosara@uncc.edu
ABSTRACT
Information visualization is a powerful method for understanding
and working with data. However, we still have an incomplete un-
derstanding of how people use visualization to think about informa-
tion. We propose that people use visualization to support compre-
hension and reasoning by viewing abstract visual representations
as physical scenes with a set of implied dynamics between objects.
Inferences based on these implied dynamics are metaphorically ex-
tended to form inferences about the represented information. This
view predicts that even seemingly meaningless properties of a visu-
alization, including such minor design elements as borders, back-
ground areas, and the connectedness of parts, may affect how peo-
ple perceive semantic aspects of data by suggesting different poten-
tial dynamics between data points. We present a study that supports
this claim and discuss the design implications of this theory of in-
formation visualization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: Miscellaneous
1. INTRODUCTION
The power of information visualization arises from its ability
to apply perception and visual thinking to understanding complex
data and solving difficult analytical problems. This use of visual
thinking also raises many unanswered questions about how visual-
ization works. How do images perceived by a user become infor-
mation she can analyze? How do the surface properties of those
images affect her understanding of that information?
Although visualization makes use of the idea that making infor-
mation visual contributes somehow to the reasoning process, de-
signing visualization in practice is often seen as simply a matter
of maximizing the amount of visible information in the assump-
tion that it will be transferred to the user’s head in a straightfor-
ward manner. There is traditionally little consideration for the ways
in which the design of this presentation of information can affect
its comprehension. This lack of consideration can lead to unex-
pected and problematic results. There is evidence that information-
ally equivalent charts with different designs can lead to surprisingly
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
AVI ‘10, May 25-29, 2010, Rome, Italy
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0076-6/10/05 ...$10.00.
Original
Filled area Outlined area
Bordered parts Separated parts
Figure 1: A pie chart in five different design configurations.
large differences in user responses. Zacks and Tversky [18] showed
that users viewing a two-point line graph will often interpret the
data as a trend even when the graph depicts two separate groups,
such as males and females. This can lead to odd descriptions of
the data, such as, “The more male a person is, the taller he/she is.”
More seriously, Elting et al. [5] found significant differences in the
number of errors produced by physicians viewing the same clini-
cal study data in several charts of different types and presentation
styles. The design of data presentation in this case affects not only
users’ immediate perceptions, but also the decisions they make.
Part of the reason these effects are not accounted for in visual-
ization theory is that it has historically focused on the perceptual
qualities of individual visual objects. This has yielded a large body
of knowledge on how perceptual elements such as color, size, and
position can be read from a visualization, but this object-level the-
ory has had less to say about how a user interprets the overall struc-
ture of a visualization scene. One problem of this narrow focus is
that it places the emphasis of visualization theory on the syntax of
information visualization, without considering its semantics. This
reductionist viewpoint, while useful, needs to be supplemented by
a holistic view of how visualization works. For all we have learned
about how information is mapped to a visual form and then read by
a user, we have very little sense of the impact of the visualization
as a whole on the user’s overall mental model of the data.
We argue that findings in visual cognition strongly suggest that
design choices in a visualization do significantly affect how this
mental model of data is constructed by a user. What is needed is
a theoretical framework to explain how such design choices affect
the interpretation and use of information visualization systems. We
theorize that visualization use involves not just the passive decod-
ing of information, but also an active simulation of visual dynam-
ics that supports reasoning about that information. Elements that
do not carry information about data points may therefore still carry
semantic information about these implied visual dynamics. These
design elements can thus affect how a user understands and reasons
with visualized information.
In order to elaborate upon and test this hypothesis, we performed
a study in which four design elements (Figure 1) were manipulated
in various combinations across five simple visualization types (Fig-
ure 2). We measured whether participants rated the data visualized
differently across each of these configurations on a number of se-
mantic dimensions relating to the implied dynamics of the visual
scene as well as the structure of the data. We contribute a review
of previous work that places visualization use in the context of dy-
namic simulations of visual scenes, the quantitative and qualitita-
tive results of a study that provides preliminary support for this
theory, and a set of design implications based on our findings.
2. RELATED WORK
The foundation of our work is the idea that the surface structure
of a visualization can affect a user’s understanding of the structure
of the data it visualizes. Research in cognitive science and visu-
alization do suggest a powerful connection between perceived vi-
sual dynamics and conceived information relationships. Zacks and
Tversky [18] show that participants’ interpretation of a simple two-
point chart as representing either a trend or two separate groups is
more influenced by the type of chart (i.e., bar chart or line graph)
than by the type of data. Similarly, Richardson et al. [14] studied
the types of simple diagrams generated by participants prompted to
visually represent a series of verbs. The consistencies across partic-
ipants found by the authors provides evidence for strong semantic
associations with simple visual structures.
There has been work in visualization and human-computer in-
teraction that studies the effects of visual structure by primarily
focusing on how visual presentation affects the way a user accesses
information [11]. However, there is also evidence from these fields
that visual structure can affect mental models of data in a more pro-
found way. Research on the effect of visual metaphors on visual-
ization use suggests that visual structure can be thought of as analo-
gous to conceptual metaphors in language, and that visual and ver-
bal metaphors can interfere with each other in the course of reading
a visualization [19]. An interesting aspect of verbal metaphors is
that they usually map properties of abstract concepts such as emo-
tions or ideas to properties of physical objects, and that inferences
about the abstract concept are often drawn from physical simula-
tions of the metaphor’s source [10].
Similarly, our view of visualization is based on the idea that peo-
ple reason with visual representations in part by viewing them as
dynamic physical scenes and simulating the forces acting on them.
This premise is strongly supported by findings in psychology and
cognitive science. The foundation of this work comes from Freyd,
who found that people recalling a variety of both photographic and
diagrammatic scenes with implied motion tend to remember ob-
jects as being farther along in their path of motion than they actu-
ally were [6]. The same effect also appears in line drawings with no
apparent motion but which suggest the presence of physical forces
such as gravity or spring compression [7]. These and related find-
ings provide evidence that perception involves active simulation of
what might happen next in a scene, based on the apparent forces
at work, such as gravity, friction, and momentum [9] and the per-
ceived relationships between objects in a scene, such as whether
they contact, support, or are attached to one another [15].
(a) waffle chart (b) bars
(c) pie chart (d) donut (e) bubble chart
Figure 2: The five chart types used in the study.
This work dovetails with that of the art theorist and psychologist
Rudolf Arnheim, who suggests [2, 3] that a physical property such
as gravity is naturally applied to our interpretation of the semantic
content of shapes and their composition in a visual scene, explain-
ing the emotional effects of abstract art such as that of Josef Albers
or Piet Mondrian. These ideas also bear some relation to the idea of
affordances, in which perceived objects are seen in terms of their
potential for action by some agent [8]. Perceived affordances, in
a broad interpretation, are often used as a framework for interface
design [13]. Clearly, the idea that a scene’s implied dynamics and
physical properties can carry meaning is not unknown in design or
human-computer interaction. However, we still lack the ability to
reliably predict what meanings will be carried by a given design.
3. HYPOTHESIS
We propose that the meaning carried by visual design derives
from the user’s performing dynamic simulations with perceived
visual objects and metaphorically interpreting the results of those
simulations as inferences about information. As a first step in sup-
porting this theory, we hypothesize that design elements that carry
implicit physical information, such as borders, connectedness, and
background shapes, can have significant and consistent effects on
how a user interprets a visualization. Specifically, we believe that
the implied dynamics of a visualization as derived from elements
of its visual design can be shown to affect subjective responses to
entities represented in visualized data in a reliable and systematic
fashion. We further hypothesize that while these effects will be
present and to some extent consistent across visualization types,
they can also be generated by the visualization type itself, and de-
sign elements will affect different visualizations in different ways.
4. METHODS
In order to test our hypotheses, we designed a study to test the
effects of visualization design elements on semantic judgements of
data in a simple context. This study was meant to test whether a
particular set of design elements indeed have a significant effect
on semantic judgements, and to what extent these design elements
affect various types of simple information visualizations.
4.1 Participants
We recruited 43 participants via Amazon’s Mechanical Turk [1].
Participants performed the study online and were paid a base rate
Joined Parts Separate Parts
Unfilled Area Filled Area Unfilled Area Filled Area
N
o 
O
ut
lin
e
N
o 
O
ut
lin
e
O
ut
lin
ed
 A
re
a
O
ut
lin
ed
 A
re
a
Bordered Parts Bordered Parts
Bordered Parts Bordered Parts
Bordered Parts
Bordered Parts
Bordered Parts
Bordered Parts
Unbordered Parts Unbordered Parts
Unbordered Parts Unbordered Parts
Unbordered Parts Unbordered Parts
Unbordered Parts Unbordered Parts
N
o 
O
ut
lin
e
O
ut
lin
ed
 A
re
a
N
o 
O
ut
lin
e
O
ut
lin
ed
 A
re
a
Figure 3: The stacked bar chart in each of the sixteen design configurations used in the study. These sixteen configurations represent
every combination of the four binary design element variables we chose.
of $0.20 for their work, which took at most twenty minutes. They
were told that giving especially helpful responses (defined as de-
tailed, thoughtful, and clearly written) would yield a bonus pay-
ment of $1.00. Twelve participants ultimately received this bonus.
One participant was dropped from the study and not compen-
sated due to a clear attempt to cheat the system by entering the
same response for every question, leaving a total of 42 participants.
Of the remaining participants, 25 were female (59.5%) and 17 were
male (40.5%). Participant age ranged from 21 to 62, with an aver-
age age of 36.4.
4.2 Materials
Participants viewed a series of twenty charts which were de-
scribed as representing fictional companies. Each company was
divided into six departments, with the pieces in a chart represent-
ing departments sized according to the department’s relative ex-
penditures for a fiscal year. These proportions were the same for
all twenty charts, but the order and coloring of the departments
in each chart was randomized to conceal this fact. Although we
cannot know for certain whether this was successful, only one par-
ticipant’s comments indicated that he realized that the proportions
were all the same. The colors were derived from a categorical color
scale from ColorBrewer [4]. This “company/department” descrip-
tion was used because it is a largely abstract concept that can lend
itself to different conceptualizations, but is still familiar enough that
participants could easily interpret data about it.
We used five types of charts to display the relationships of the de-
partments to the company: a pie chart, a waffle chart (or one-level
treemap), a horizontal stacked bar chart, a donut chart, and a bub-
ble chart (Figure 2). These visualizations were chosen to represent
a range of shapes and relative familiarity, while all being simple
enough to evaluate quickly.
Having chosen this set of visualizations, we systematically al-
tered them according to four design dimensions. These dimensions
represented the presence or absence of some element we hypothe-
sized to have semantic value. The elements were:
Filled area. In charts with a filled area, a gray background was vis-
ible behind the main chart which mimicked its overall shape
but at a larger size. For the bubble chart, which is not space-
filling, we used a circle as the filled area.
Outlined area. In charts with an outlined area, a black contour
was drawn around the chart in the same shape as the main
chart but at a larger size. For the bubble chart, we used a
circular outline.
Bordered parts. In charts with bordered parts, black contours were
drawn around each of the individual pieces.
Joined parts. In charts with joined parts, pieces were connected
to one another in the manner most natural for a given visu-
alization type. In separated parts conditions, the view was
“exploded” so that a small amount of space was visible be-
tween parts.
With two possible states for each of these four variables, there
were a total of sixteen design configurations for each of the chart
types. Figure 3 shows these sixteen configurations applied to the
bar chart.
These design elements were chosen because outlines, color ar-
eas, and connectivity are among the cues that visualization research-
ers such as Ware [17] and Tversky et al. [16] consider to be mean-
ingful visual primitives. Additionally, we hypothesized each to
have a unique semantic effect on the dynamics of the visual repre-
sentation. We expected a filled area to suggest a stable foundation,
the outlined area to suggest a limit or fence around the entire com-
pany, bordered parts to suggest limits on individual pieces, and the
joining of parts to suggest connections between pieces.
To test these hypotheses, we developed a list of ten semantic
variables which could describe a simple dataset of the kind we pre-
sented in structural terms. On a scale of one to five, we asked partic-
ipants to rate how much the company presented in a chart was likely
to be stable, complete, controlled, inflexible, rigid, structured, iso-
lated, unified, well-organized, and good place to work.
While these variables were primarily chosen to represent a broad
range of abstract structural qualities a company might have, they
can also be interpreted as representing a range of dynamic physical
properties. For example, rigid and inflexible may imply that a scene
cannot be simulated as changing very much. Stable and controlled
suggest that a figure is well supported and will not move without
additional forces. Unified and complete may suggest that parts are
seen as attached to one another and will move as a unit, while iso-
lated may suggest that parts will move independently. Structured
may imply that the scene represents a connected unit with dynam-
ics in balance. The last two semantic variables, good place to work
Scale Item Factor 1 (Balance) Factor 2 (Strictness)
Complete .795 .053
Controlled .530 .559
Good Place to Work .633 -.368
Inflexible .141 .852
Isolated -.250 .530
Rigid .211 .852
Stable .819 .057
Structured .752 .331
Unified .753 .073
Well-organized .823 .062
Table 1: Factor loadings for the two factors we derived from the
original ten semantic scale items, using a principal component
analysis with Varimax rotation.
and well-organized, are more subjective and may represent combi-
nations of the other variables.
4.3 Procedure
We varied two of the four design elements between subjects
(filled areas and bordered parts) and two of the elements within
subjects (outlined areas and joined parts). The purpose of vary-
ing some elements between subjects was to reduce the number of
charts a participant saw in order to avoid fatigue. We hypothesized
that the design elements we chose as between-subjects variables
were less likely to have an effect than the within-subject variables,
although this did not entirely prove to be the case.
In the first part of the study, participants saw a series of twenty
charts described as representing fictional companies. Participants
were told that segments in a chart represented the departments of
the company, and that the size of each segment represented the
amount of spending by that department over a fiscal year. The
ten semantic variables were presented below each chart, in an or-
der which was randomized for each participant but kept consistent
throughout a single participants’ progress. Participants were told to
rate each company on these semantic variables to the best of their
ability based on the information in the chart. The charts each par-
ticipant saw included four versions of each of the five chart types,
varied on the two within-subjects variables of outlined area and
joined parts. These charts were presented in random order. After
the participant rated each chart on all ten variables, she clicked a
button to continue to the next chart.
In addition to this main part of the study, we wished to give the
participants an opportunity to explain their ratings in more detail
so we could better understand how they viewed the charts seman-
tically. We also wanted to make sure that participants felt com-
fortable rating the companies based on the charts and were able
to give reasons for their ratings. After the first part of the study,
we chose four pairs of charts to present to the participant. These
pairs included two pairs in which the charts were visually similar
(that is, were mostly the same on the visual dimensions) but were
rated very differently by the participant, and two pairs in which the
charts were visually different but rated similarly. We calculated the
difference in ratings for every pair of charts by taking an average
of the absolute difference between their ratings on each of the ten
semantic dimensions. During the second phase of the study, we
presented the two charts in each pair to the participant side by side
and provided a text box in which she was asked to explain why she
rated the charts either similarly or differently.
Once the participants finished these two phases of the study, they
were asked to provide their gender and age in an additional form on
the Mechanical Turk site.
Factor Group Balance Strictness
M S.D. M S.D.
Filled Area yes -.032 .12 .004 .11no -.067 .12 .106 .12
Bordered Parts yes -.071 .12 .125 .12no .043 .11 -.086 .11
Joined Parts yes .160 .09 .073 .09no -.188 .10 -.035 .09
Outlined Area yes -.030 .09 .022 .09no .002 .08 .016 .09
Table 2: Means in the two derived semantic factors for each
of the four design elements we studied. Only the variable of
Joined Parts had a significant main effect on the factor of Bal-
ance.
5. RESULTS
Since our ten items in the scale we employed likely show a good
deal of semantic overlap, the first step in analyzing these results
was to reduce the number of dimensions using factor analysis. We
employed a principle components analysis with varimax rotation
and selected the resulting factors with an eigenvalue greater than
one, which produced two factors. On examination of the factor
loading (Table 1), the first factor seems to encompass the scale
items that are more positive and suggest stability and good orga-
nization, while the second factor encompasses the items that are
more negative and suggest rigidity and oppressiveness. However,
since the written responses by participants show some variation be-
tween subjects as to which of the scale items were considered neg-
atively or positively, I will refer to these factors more neutrally as
“Balance” and “Strictness” in the subsequent analysis.
The effect of our overall model (a 2x2x2x2x5 design, with the
four design elements and chart type) on these factors was first as-
sessed with a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) using
Wilks’ Lambda as the test statistic . This analysis found a signif-
icant main effect of chart type, F (8, 31) = 3.04, p < .05, ?2 =
.44. There was also a significant effect of joined parts, F (2, 37) =
7.11, p < .01, ?2 = .28. In addition, there were significant in-
teractions of filled area by bordered parts (F (2, 37) = 3.82, p <
.05, ?2 = .17), outlined area by joined parts (F (2, 37) = 3.94,
p < .05, ?2 = .18), and chart type by outlined area by filled
area (F (8, 31) = 2.51, p < .05, ?2 = .36). There was also
a marginally significant interaction between chart type and joined
parts, F (8, 31) = 2.21, p = .054, ?2 = .36. Results that were
significant in the multivariate analysis were further analyzed with
univariate analyses of variance (ANOVA) for the two factors.
5.1 Main Effects
A summary of the main effects of the four design elements on
the factors of Balance and Strictness is presented in Table 2. The
only design element that produced a significant main effect in the
MANOVA was joined parts, which a univariate repeated measures
ANOVA found to be significant on the factor of Balance, F (1, 39) =
12.18, p < .001, ?2 = .24. That is, charts with joined parts
(M = .16, S.D. = .09) were rated significantly higher on this
factor than those with separated parts (M = ?.19, S.D. = .09).
In addition, we found a significant main effect of chart type on
both Balance, F (2.73, 39) = 8.32, p < .001, ?2 = .18, and
Strictness, F (2.43, 39) = 6.38, p < .001, ?2 = .14. (Since
the variable of chart type did not meet the assumption of spheric-
ity for either factor, we employed a Greenhouse-Geisser correction
on these ANOVAs.) The means for each chart type on these two
Chart Type Balance Strictness
M S.D. M S.D.
waffle .179 .11 .301 .11
bars .085 .13 .204 .13
pie .116 .08 -.045 .10
donut -.002 .09 -.093 .12
bubble -.447 .14 -.271 .12
Table 3: Means in the two derived semantic factors for each of
the five chart types.
factors are summarized in Table 3. In general, these results show
that the bubble chart is rated as much less Balanced than the other
charts, meaning it was seen as less stable, unified, complete, and
well-organized. Bubble charts were also rated as less Strict than the
other chart types, and the rectangular charts–i.e., bars and waffles–
were rated as more Strict than the predominantly circular charts,
meaning they were rated as more rigid, inflexible, structured, and
controlled.
5.2 Interactions Between Design Elements
In addition to these main effects, we also found several signifi-
cant interactions in our overall model. Repeated measures ANOVAs
found the interaction between filled area and bordered parts to be
significant for both Balance (F (1, 39) = 4.95, p < .05, ?2 = .12)
and Strictness (F (1, 39) = 5.28, p < .05, ?2 = .12). These
interactions are illustrated in Figure 4. Either a filled area or bor-
dered parts on their own seem to increase perceptions of Balance,
but the presence of both elements or neither element creates the
perception of less Balance. This suggests that the positive effects
these elements have on perceptions of organization interfere with
one another in some way. The effect of the interaction on Strict-
ness adds some nuance to this interpretation. A chart with both a
filled area and bordered parts is rated as highly Strict, as is a chart
with neither element, which is complimentary to the Balance ef-
fect. However, while a chart with borders and no filled area is rated
neutrally on the factor of Strictness, a chart with a filled area and no
borders is rated as much less Strict. This suggests that a filled area
produces a perception of flexibility which is somehow tempered by
the presence of borders around parts.
The interaction of outlined area by joined parts was significant
only for the factor of Balance, F (1, 39) = 8.08, p < .01, ?2 =
.175. This interaction seems to arise from the fact that the differ-
ence in Balance between a chart with joined and separated parts is
larger when there is no outline around the chart area. This offers
the intriguing possibility that the perceived instability of the “ex-
ploded” charts is mitigated when there is a boundary limiting the
perceived motion of the pieces.
In addition to interactions between design elements, we also found
minor but significant interactions between chart type and joined
parts for both the factor of Balance (F (4, 39) = 3.56, p < .01,
?2 = .09) and Strictness (F (4, 39) = 2.51, p < .05, ?2 = .06).
The means for these conditions are summarized in Table 4. Gen-
erally, the perceived Balance of a bar chart or bubble chart is less
affected by whether pieces are joined or not than that of other chart
types. Additionally, pie charts show a greater loss of Strictness
when parts are separated than do the other chart types. As with the
factor of Balance, bars are largely unaffected by separation for the
Strictness factor, and donut charts show a slight trend in the op-
posite direction, with separated charts perceived as more Strict on
average than joined ones.
Finally, there is a three-way interaction of chart type, outlined
Chart Type Joined Parts Balance Strictness
M S.D. M S.D.
waffle joined .406 .13 .370 .11separated -.049 .13 .231 .14
bars joined .140 .15 .202 .14separated .029 .14 .206 .14
pie joined .340 .12 .121 .13separated -.109 .12 -.211 .11
donut joined .295 .11 -.132 .12separated -.299 .13 -.054 .14
bubbles joined -.382 .14 -.197 .13separated -.512 .16 -.346 .13
Table 4: Means for each of the five chart types across the design
variable of joined parts.
area, and filled area for the factor of Balance, F (4, 39) = 2.98,
p < .05, ?2 = .07. This difference seems to be mostly attributable
to the fact that for waffle charts alone, an outline increases the per-
ception of Balance only when there is no fill, and vice versa. This
recalls to some extent the interaction of filled area and bordered
parts, and suggests that outlines and fills, combined with an already
quite rigid visual structure, can lead to a more negative impression.
6. GENERAL DISCUSSION
It is clear from the quantitative results of this study that design
elements in a simple visualization context can have significant and
to some extent consistent effects on a user’s semantic evaluation of
data. In addition to the simple semantic ratings, we also attempted
to analyze the reasons for these ratings in the second part of our
study, in which participants were asked to explain selected ratings.
These explanations can shed some light on what design elements
mean to users. There were no significant patterns to the types or
configurations of charts automatically chosen for comparison, so
participant comments covered a wide range of conditions. In gen-
eral, these comments tended to reinforce our quantitative results
and provided anecdotal evidence that a tendency to interpret charts
as dynamic physical scenes leads to the patterns of semantic ratings
that we found. They also demonstrate that our users were easily
able to explain their ratings in almost all cases, suggesting that the
task, while unusual, was understandable; only one of our 42 par-
ticipants reported having difficulty rating the companies based on
the charts. While many comments were minimal or did not address
structural properties (for example, comments in which a partici-
pant preferred one chart to another because the colors were more
pleasing), those which were more elaborate did tend to talk about
dynamic and physical qualities of the chart.
6.1 Implied Dynamics of Chart Types
One common theme throughout these explanations was a treat-
ment of both design elements and chart types as offering various
potentials for movement or communication. For example, two sep-
arate participants explained that they considered the donut chart
less stable because it seemed like it might “roll away.” This kind of
analysis also seemed to underly the evaluations of the bubble chart
as unstable and uncontrolled, with participants describing this chart
as “floating bubbles that were barely contained within the area”
and “scattered.” (It should be noted that apart from a mention of
the pie chart in the initial instructions, we did not name or label
the charts in the study, so the participant who described the bubble
chart as “bubbles” did so spontaneously.) These comments sug-
gest that at least some participants were implicitly applying gravity
Figure 4: We found a significant interaction between the design factors of filled area and bordered parts. Balance increased when
only one of the factors was present, but decreased when both or neither were present. Strictness was increased when both or neither
were present, but was much lower when there was a fill but no part borders.
to the charts, and found the bubbles disconcerting because they so
strongly seemed to violate the constraints of gravity.
This kind of description may also help to explain why why per-
ceived Strictness was seemingly reduced with a filled area. One
participant describing a bubble chart on a filled area said that it
looked “as if the parts were placed randomly, with room to move
them around,” and another that it seemed “as if the company doesn’t
quite know how big it is.” Of the five visualization types we pre-
sented, the bubble chart was the one with the least constraints on
placement of parts; in the other four cases, the pieces are filling a
predefined space of one shape or another. The arbitrary nature of
the bubbles’ placement, then, may be highlighted when there is a
clearly defined space in which they can “move.” In contrast, one
participant described departments in the space-filling waffle chart
as having “no room to move around.”
6.2 Implied Dynamics of Design Elements
A similar sense of physical potential seemed to inform partic-
ipants’ ratings of the different design elements. For example, a
common observation was that charts without joined pieces seem to
be “flying apart” or “exploding.” Since the pieces in this case are
not supporting each other, the scene may be interpreted as being
in a state of motion. It is therefore more unstable, complete, and
flexible, since the pieces have not yet come to rest. Another possi-
bility is that participants see a joined chart as a natural state, so that
separation between pieces implies movement.
Aside from the expected physical simulations pointed to by these
comments, another common theme was that different design con-
figurations allowed for different amounts of communication be-
tween parts. This theme sheds light on the interaction between
filled area and bordered parts. Describing a pie chart and a bubble
chart that she rated similarly despite their differing on all dimen-
sions except for filled area and bordered parts, one participant wrote
that “they both represent difficulties in communication within the
organization.” Since the filled areas and bordered parts condition
places two types of barrier between or around pieces, it may be
seen as allowing less communication between parts and therefore a
worse place to work.
A similar kind of analysis based on combined design features is
hinted at by a participant who compared two charts with part bor-
ders, one with joined parts and one without. This participant de-
scribed the company with separate parts as being “closed” and the
one with joined parts as “not so closed,” suggesting that the bound-
aries around parts are seen as less rigid when parts share borders.
This participant went on to describe the company with joined parts
as having “a more controlled flexibility.”
Finally, the combined effect of filled areas and joined parts was
referred to by two participants, although they seemed to offer two
entirely different reasons for a similar assessment. One, compar-
ing two similarly rated charts with filled areas and separate parts,
wrote, “Both of these charts have so much gray area between the
departments.” This suggests that filled areas and separate parts are
rated as poor places to work because of the presence of a visible
barrier between parts. However, another participant who was com-
paring a chart with a filled area and separate parts (on the left) to
one with a filled area and joined parts (on the right) wrote, “The
company on the left is off its foundation (the gray circle), whereas
the company on the right is centered on its foundation.” (Both
charts were, in fact, centered within their filled areas.) This offers
the alternate possibility that the movement suggested by separated
parts may create a sense of precariousness if the user views the
filled area as a foundation on which pieces rest. Interestingly, these
two sets of comments imply that a chart may lend itself to different
interpretations depending on whether the user perceives gravity as
moving downwards or moving into the screen; that is, whether she
sees herself as looking at a side view or a top-down view of the
scene.
The physical interpretations of chart elements provided by par-
ticipants suggest the potential usefulness of implied dynamics as
a framework on which to hang a theory of how design elements
contribute to visual structure. However, the apparent differences in
how participants interpreted these physical properties suggested in
the last example make clear that reliably defining these mappings
between visual elements and physical properties is by no means a
trivial process.
6.3 The Extent of Elaborations
While users’ comments suggested a strong influence of physical
simulation on their semantic perceptions of the charts they saw, it
could be argued that this influence does not go beyond simple vi-
sual organization to affect how participants actually think about the
data. Most comments, such as those already quoted, tend to focus
on properties that could apply equally well to either visual structure
or the more abstract structure of a company; for example, balance,
barriers, and movement are all common themes. This relatively di-
rect metaphorical application of visual properties to abstract prop-
erties is largely what we expected to find in the user comments.
However, participants’ comments often went beyond this sim-
ple metaphorical mapping to make elaborate inferences about the
company’s behavior and management style in terms that did not
obviously map to visual properties of the chart. This was espe-
cially common in descriptions of companies visualized with a bub-
ble chart, which various participants found “more organic and co-
operative,” “fun and open,” “easy to get along with,” and “open
source.” At the same time, one participant stated that they could
not treat the company portrayed in a bubble chart seriously. The
waffle chart also elicited a number of emotional responses in the op-
posite direction, and was described as “bulkier,” “organized,” and
“regimented.” These emotional responses to the waffle and bub-
ble charts recall the fact that these were also the types that tended
to receive the most extreme ratings on the semantic variables (Ta-
ble 3). Since these are probably the two least familiar charts pre-
sented in our study, these results suggest that extensive elaboration
is a greater factor in novel charts, whereas highly conventional rep-
resentations such as pie charts may require less active interpretation
on the user’s part.
There were several cases in which these elaborate inferences
went so far as to suggest that participants were able to imagine
entire stories about the companies based on the simple charts they
viewed. In describing a waffle chart, one participant wrote, “Go-
ing by the rules is the most important thing in this company and
to violate them can get you in serious trouble.” Another, describ-
ing the similarities between a donut and bubble chart, wrote, “They
have some rules but they are mainly focused on encouraging peo-
ple to do their best in terms of reaching a mutual goal. They don’t
want to stifle creativity, they want to encourage it.” Eight of the 42
participants wrote at least one description that involved this kind
of storytelling about the depicted companies. While these usually
were based on the chart type, one participant elaborated upon the
company based on the presence of a outlined area: “The graph on
the left is encompassed by an extra circle—I took this to mean that
there was some kind of higher up that kept all the smaller parts in
line.” That participants made these kind of imaginative elaborations
at all, and that there seem to be some commonalities among them,
is striking in itself, and suggests that visual structure can in some
cases lead not only to minor semantic responses but to full-fledged
inferences about the data.
6.4 Color and Weight Perception
A final trend in user comments suggested another factor that we
did not directly consider in our initial study design. The colors
of individual pieces were randomly generated at the point each
chart was displayed, and we did not record these color combina-
tions. However, several comments suggested that the arrangement
of color affected how some users perceived the weight and balance
of the charts. One participant said that a red segment in one pie
chart looked larger than a blue segment in a second pie chart, even
though she realized they were the same size. Another participant
wrote that “the two largest sections, in brown and muddy green,
recede a bit, making them seem more balanced by the red, vibrant
blue and pink—that is, the two bigger sections have colors that
make them seem less dominant.”
These comments may reflect the established finding that darker
colors are perceived as being heavier than bright ones [12], and the
red color used in our study was in fact the color with the lowest
luminance value. The different weights perceived in pieces with
different colors may have affected how participants viewed the dy-
namics of the charts. For example, the comments about color bal-
ance may reflect the perceived center of gravity of an object. Also,
while describing a donut chart with separated parts, a participant
wrote that “the pieces appear to be flying apart, especially the dom-
inating bright red of the largest slice.” This implies that the heavier
color is perceived as giving extra velocity to the implied movement
of the piece. While these comments point towards a role for color
in interpreting the dynamics of a visual representation, the fact that
we did not record this information unfortunately makes it impossi-
ble to interpret this trend in the current study.
7. IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
We have provided theoretical background and experimental evi-
dence that the implied dynamics of a visualization design influence
how users interpret the meaning of information. We further argue
that these dynamic interpretations guide both inference and a user’s
perception of how a visual representation can be manipulated. This
theory has a number of significant implications for the design of
interfaces that use information visualization.
The first implication is that a better understanding of the seman-
tics of design elements would make it possible to exploit their ef-
fects as is appropriate to the task. Rather than treating design as
decoration or distraction, it could be used consciously to suggest
global attributes of the dataset or to communicate interpretations
of data in a collaborative context. While this may not be a novel
idea to the design community at large, it is less intuitive in infor-
mation visualization, where design elements such as those used in
our study have traditionally been considered irrelevant at best. The
fact that the presence or absence of these elements can actively
influence interpretations of data, occasionally to a high degree of
elaboration, suggest that design cannot be simply ignored or min-
imized in information visualization contexts. Every design choice
is a choice about how the data will be interpreted.
A common theme in our results and user comments is that differ-
ent design configurations suggested different levels of movement
and freedom. The waffle charts and bar charts were seen as rigid
and fixed; charts with filled background areas suggested more flex-
ibility. These findings may have practical implications for design-
ing interactive visualizations and other types of interfaces. Charts
and visualizations with designs that imply flexibility and move-
ment may suggest more potential points of interaction to the user.
Rectangular, space-filling designs (such as treemaps) may be better
suited to cases where limited interaction is needed, while a more
open design with a clearly delineated space in which pieces can
move may encourage users to interact more extensively.
The idea of implied dynamics may in general provide a frame-
work for building intuitive interactions into novel user interfaces.
How to make possible interactions in a novel system discoverable
is a general problem in human-computer interaction, and is some-
times addressed with the idea of perceived affordances [13]. That
an abstract scene such as a software interface may inherently present
a set of implicit physical properties and forces suggests that de-
signers could visually play up certain dynamics in order to guide
a user’s understanding of what can be done. For example, items
that can be moved can be made to appear lighter, while items that
cannot be changed can be made to look heavy and rigid.
Implied dynamics of visualizations may also constrain design in
certain ways. Many of the negative comments made about the bub-
ble chart and the various exploded charts (that is, those without
joined parts) suggest that the lack of support and apparent viola-
tion of perceived gravity in these visualizations makes them seem
chaotic and disorganized. This may or may not be a problem for a
given task, but in the information visualization context it may have
the undesirable effect of distracting from whatever organization or
structure the data actually has. If implied dynamics are indeed an
important part of visualization perception, then any visual repre-
sentation that strongly implies motion, such as an exploded chart,
should be used with care.
Another practical use for our findings is that they suggest cer-
tain visualization types which are more or less susceptible to the
effects of design. In general, we found that the design elements
we used had effects that were consistent across a variety of chart
types, suggesting that they have basic effects on perception inde-
pendent of their context. However, we also found a non-significant
trend for ratings of the bubble chart to be more design-sensitive
and those of the pie chart to be more robust to design changes.
This may be an effect of the relative familiarity of the two chart
types, or it may speak to a more essential difference between their
structures. Studying the design robustness of a given visualization
would provide valuable information in the evaluation process and
help in making decisions about visualization use.
8. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work serves as a first step in the process of understanding
how elements of visual structure can influence semantic interpreta-
tions of data. We have provided evidence that these influences can
be reliable and to an extent predictable. The semantic impact of
structural elements must be taken into account when designing and
evaluating visualization methods. By focusing solely on a user’s
ability to read data points from a visualization, without consider-
ing how she views the dataset as a whole based on elements of the
visual design, we may be missing the forest for the trees.
Ultimately, our goal should be to model these effects within a
theoretical framework of how people perceive visual structure as
information structure. Implied dynamics and the other physical
properties frequently described by participants may be a useful ba-
sis for such a framework. We have begun studying the viability of
implied dynamics as a model of visualization use by attempting to
replicate the implied motion findings from cognitive science [7] in
a visualization context, and preliminary results suggest that items
in a visualization may indeed show an effect of gravity on the per-
ceived motion of items in a scatterplot. However, much more work
is needed to establish a set of correspondences between visual de-
sign, the dynamic properties it affords, and the semantic inferences
these cause users to reach.
Finally, this work uncovered major gender effects in responses to
visual structure. These gender differences are complex and difficult
to interpret, going beyond differential spatial skills into a less well-
understood area. There were no clear patterns in the explanations
that shed light on these gender effects. Further study should be
done in order to understand why different user groups may respond
to visual structure differently, and how these differences should af-
fect visualization research and design.
Interpretations of data in a visualization can go beyond the sim-
ple reading of data, and the semantic implications of design ele-
ments guide these interpretations in consistent ways. Although the
effects of design elements may seem undesirable in a pure infor-
mation visualization context, understanding their nature and how
to predict them will ultimately give us the tools to control them.
9. REFERENCES
[1] Amazon Mechanical Turk, http://aws.amazon.com/mturk/.
Retrieved 10-16-2008.
[2] R. Arnheim. Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the
Creative Eye. UC Press, 1974.
[3] R. Arnheim. The Power of the Center: A Study of
Composition in the Visual Arts. UC Press, 1988.
[4] C. Brewer and M. Harrower. ColorBrewer,
http://www.colorbrewer.org/, 2002. Retrieved 12-4-2008.
[5] L. Elting, C. Martin, S. Cantor, and E. Rubenstein. Influence
of data display formats on physician investigators’ decisions
to stop clinical trials: prospective trial with repeated
measures. BMJ, 318:1527–1531, 1999.
[6] J. Freyd. Dynamic mental representations. Psychological
Review, 94(4):427–438, 1987.
[7] J. Freyd, T. Pantzer, and J. Cheng. Representing statics as
forces in equilibrium. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
117:395–407, 1988.
[8] J. J. Gibson. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
Houghton Mifflin, 1979.
[9] T. Hubbard. Environmental invariants in the representation of
motion: Implied dynamics and representational momentum,
gravity, friction, and centripetal force. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 2(3):322–338, 1995.
[10] G. Lakoff and M. Johnson. Metaphors We Live By.
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
[11] G. Lohse and E. Johnson. A comparison of two process
tracing methods for choice tasks. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 68:28–43, 1996.
[12] M. Monroe. The apparent weight of color and correlated
phenomena. The American Journal of Psychology,
36(2):192–206, 1925.
[13] D. Norman. Affordance, conventions, and design.
Interactions, 6(3):38–43, 1999.
[14] D. Richardson, M. Spivey, L. Barsalou, and K. McRae.
Spatial representations activated during real-time
comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science, 27:767–780,
2003.
[15] J. Siskind. Grounding the lexical semantics of verbs in visual
perception using force dynamics and event logic. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 15:31–90, 2001.
[16] B. Tversky, J. Zacks, P. Lee, and J. Heiser. Lines, blobs,
crosses and arrows: Diagrammatic communication with
schematic figures. In Theory and Application of Diagrams,
pages 221–230. Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[17] C. Ware. Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann,
2008.
[18] J. Zacks and B. Tversky. Bars and lines: A study of graphic
communication. Memory & Cognition, 27(6):1073–1079,
1999.
[19] C. Ziemkiewicz and R. Kosara. The shaping of information
by visual metaphors. IEEE TVCG, 14(6):1269–1276, 2008.

