Discover Diamonds-in-the-Rough using Interactive Visual Analytics System:
Tweets as a Collective Diary of the Occupy Movement
Wenwen Dou and Derek Xiaoyu Wang and Zhiqiang Ma and William Ribarsky
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd,
Charlotte, NC, 28262
Abstract
The phenomenally wide-adoption of social media has
stimulated a new means in organizing and carrying-out
modern social movements. Exemplified by the Occupy
Movement (OM), rich information, including protest-
related events and people’s responses to those events,
is posted and shared through social media sites such as
Twitter. However, it is quite challenging to make sense
of such valuable information in a collective manner, as
it is often submerged by all the other content on Twitter.
In this case study, we demonstrate the combination of
computational methods (e.g., topic modeling and event
detection) and interactive visual analytics in facilitating
users to examine how relevant tweets can reflect a col-
lective view of a social movement. In particular, we fo-
cus on discovering and associating key events through-
out the OM. Based on the event frequencies, our system
helps users to divide the movement into three distinct
stages. Information regarding “what” the events were
about, “when” and “where” the events occurred, and
“who” were involved is extracted from the tweets to de-
scribe each stage of the movement. The resulting case
studies show that we can indeed construct a collective
diary of the social movement by analyzing events ex-
tracted from the content of the tweets.
Many discussions have been generated recently on the
topic of social media and the effect it may play on the for-
mation and mobilization of social movements. Social move-
ment is a type of group action that involves individuals and
organizations who focus on bringing social changes. In this
process, social media serves as a medium for the masses to
make their voices heard and to initiate and organize social
movements. Recently, we start to see the impact of the per-
vasive use of social media on organizing large-scale social
movement. Such usage is illustrated by the Bank Transfer
Day (BTD), a Facebook-launched call aimed to move money
from big financial institutions to local credit unions. While
the BTD lasted for only two weeks (Christian 2011), it pro-
duced significant results, including an estimated 1 million
consumers moving their accounts to credit unions (CSMon-
itor 2011). Through assessing whether the self-proclaimed
goals have been met, it is relatively straightforward to deter-
mine the impact of such bursty and focused protests.
Copyright c© 2013, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
However, evaluating the impact of large-scale social
protests with massive participation and a wide range of
goals, exemplified by the Occupy Movement (OM), is an
extremely challenging task. Even though such movement
has subsided significantly in recently months, it is still on-
going a year after the proclaimed start date–Sept 17, 2011.
Although traditional media report selective excerpts about
Occupy protests, they often do not adequately capture the
scale, the response, or the opinions of the protestors’ and
citizens’. Understanding the overall Occupy Movement and
the impact of its protest activities can shed light not only on
how the movement was organized and evolved, but also on
the effect of public policies dealing with the protests. Since
the Occupy Movement is known to use social media to ad-
vertise, organize, and attract protesters (Wikipedia 2012b),
we believe social media data such as tweets can be used as a
direct source to depict all major events.
In this paper, we demonstrate the use of our visual analyt-
ics system, which combines interactive human-discoveries
and a set of computational methods (including topic model-
ing and event detection), to enable domain users to effec-
tively extract major events throughout the Occupy Move-
ment. An interactive visual interface is designed to present
the events in an intuitive manner for making sense of the
causes, the actions and the impact of the events. More im-
portantly, through presenting information regarding “who,
what, when and where” of the protests, our system facilitates
the domain users (e.g., law enforcement officers) to the con-
struction of a collective diary of the movement using tweets.
DATA AND COMPUTATION
ARCHITECTURES
Different from previous work (Marcus et al. 2011; Shamma,
Kennedy, and Churchill 2010), in this paper, our system fo-
cuses on extracting event-related insights from the content of
the tweets. Such analysis is conducted based on the tweets
collected from Twitter’s GardenHose API from 07-11-2011
to 09-18-2012. To provide more focused analyses on the
movement, this tweet collection is further filtered with a gen-
eral hashtag #occupy*. The resulting dataset captures a wide
range of relevant tweets (?430,000) and hashtags, includ-
ing ones created to represent ideas and concepts exemplified
by #occupydemocracy, #occupyteaparty, #occupybank, etc.;
Figure 1: Overview of the OM in our VA system. A: Occupy hotspots over time. B: Three stages of the OM divided based on
the rise and fall of the overall activities. C: Visual summary of the Occupy activities. The x-axis represents time; each color-
coded ribbon represents a topic extracted from the tweets. Event detection is performed on individual topic to identify bursts
as indicators of events. D: Sample events labeled with corresponding keywords. E: Evidence [Evid.X] mentioned in the paper.
Note, here multiple visualizations are placed together due to the page limit. Detail about other views refer to (Dou et al. 2012)
and others that denote specific protest locations such as #Oc-
cupyBoston, #OccupySeattle, #OccupyMadrid, and etc.
The combination of the automatic data analytics and
human-discovery is at the heart of our visual analytics sys-
tem. Using the computational architecture introduced by
Wang et al. in (Wang et al. 2012), we first applied data
cleaning-and-aggregation processes to remove the contex-
tual noise in the tweets. Then we performed topic modeling
and event detection to extract meaningful insights, such as
topical trends and patterns (Dou et al. 2012). Furthermore,
we also sifted through features like Hashtags to extract key
geospatial and temporal features.
The gist of the analysis environment provided by our sys-
tem can be thought of as first organizing all tweets based
on topic and time, which is visualized in Figure 1 B with
each stream representing all tweets that focus on the spe-
cific topic. With the X-axis being time, the volume (or the
thickness) of the stream denotes the amount of tweets dis-
cussing the topic on a given day. Then an event detection
method (Dou et al. 2012) was applied to identify bursts
within each topic stream as indicators of events. Figure 1
D illustrates the resulting events highlighted by black con-
tours and labeled with a few keywords that best describe the
event. In summary, our computational architecture extracts
events in the form of topic bursts comprised of tweets dis-
cussing the event. The visual interface further presents the
extracted events throughout the OM in a temporal flow, with
keywords indicating what each event was about.
Human-discovery is involved in this process at any given
time. Users can then interactively make sense of the individ-
ual events through the visual interface, examining the tweets
discussing a specific event to discover information regard-
ing “who, what, when, and where”, as well as analyzing
people’s responses to certain events. Altogether, we provide
users a interactive visual analytics system that helps them
effectively construct a diary about a social movement.
CASE STUDY: DEVELOPMENTAL
OVERVIEW OF THE MOVEMENT
Based on the major rise and fall of the overall Twitter dis-
cussions of the Occupy protests, we as users can divide the
movement into three major stages as shown in Figure 1.
Stage I: Precursor and Preparation
Are Occupy protests orchestrated or spontaneous?
In Figure 1, our system confirms the self-proclaimed start
date of the OM and clearly illustrates its outbreak (signifi-
cant boost in volume) on 09-17-11. However, the more in-
teresting and provoking pattern (highlighted in purple) lies
in the activities before the official start date. Such pattern is
picked up by our computational methods and strongly sig-
nals a precursor to the protest. This precursor let us believe
that the OM is an orchestrated event rather than a sponta-
neous gathering. It further provides us insights on how the
movement was organized and the major players involved in
this preparation stage of the movement.
Specifically, the earliest tweet in our dataset was posted
on 07-21 with content showing strong support of the move-
ment [Evid.1]. With our interactive visualization, one can
directly link to a tweet pointed to a blog published by Ad-
busters (a Canadian-based anti-consumerist organization) on
07-13. This tweet proposed a peaceful occupation of Wall
Street to protest both corporate influence on democracy and
the increasing inequality in wealth distribution (Adbusters
2011). In addition, our geographical visualization suggested
that, at this planning stage of the movement, all geo-entities
extracted from the tweets are directly concentrated on New
York City (Figure 1 map left), using both GPS location and
our Named Entity Recognition techniques. Based on these
findings, one can infer that the Adbusters was involved in the
early organization of the movement, which is later verified
by other sources such as major news media (e.g., LATimes).
Our VA system further helped extract evidence that sig-
naled the diverse contributions from other major organiz-
ers that eventually lead to the outbreaks of the movement.
For example, the hacker group Anonymous posted tweets to
motivate the crowd on Aug 19 [Evid.2]. Meanwhile, other
contributing groups such as US Day of Rage (#usdor) advo-
cated a non-violent movement by providing legal info for the
movement on 08-27-2011 [Evid.3]. Just by quickly glanc-
ing through our visualization of tweets from this stage, one
can already identify these three major groups that helped or-
ganizing the Occupy Movement, and further determine the
orchestrated nature of the movement.
Stage II: Outbreak and Rapid Development
Who helped OM jump on the public bandwagon? Who
joined the protest? And for what cause?
The organization of the OM has led to a successful out-
break on the 09-17. As suggested by the significant traffic
jump on the #occupy topic in the following two months,
one can tell that the movement entered a rapid develop-
ment stage. As further evidenced in the maps in Figure 1,
the rapid, almost instantaneous, geospatial spread was an-
other contributing factor to the successful outbreak. The key
to decode such rapid growth and to assess its impact lies in
users’ depiction of the demographics and the motivations of
the people contributing to the movement.
Through interacting with the event results from our com-
putation methods, one can quickly identify a few repre-
sentative groups that participated and influenced the Oc-
cupy Movement. Through examining tweets discussing the
events, the cause for their endorsement of the movement can
be derived. For example, our visualization clearly suggested
(Figure 1) that, on 09-28, the New York Transit Workers
Union voted to support the OM, bringing hundreds more
protestors on the street [Evid.4]. Furthermore, our Hashtag
analysis revealed that this also led to a much larger endorse-
ment from several more labor unions supporting the OM,
only within days from prior move [Evid.5,6]. Only a few
days later, our visualization (the blue event rectangle) further
indicated that burst topics labeled with keywords “marine,
country, fought” emerged on 10-02. This captured the facts
that veterans joined the movement to act as a first line of
defense between the police and protesters (DailyKosGroup
2011)[Evid.9]. One week later, university faculties and stu-
dents showed their support to the OM on 10-10. [Evid.7&8],
where they banded together to make their voices heard, cit-
ing the rising amount of student loan debt and the increasing
cost of college (HuffingtonPost 2011).
The massive endorsements from these diverse groups, in
such a short time period, suggested that the success of Oc-
cupy protest largely relies on the wide spectrum of citizen
participation. Some came to protect the protestors, while
others wanted to voice their frustrations. Using the analysis
and visual interaction, one was able to quickly identify the
groups and infer their motivations for endorsing the OM.
Is there violence?
Although the OM was set to hold peaceful demonstrations
as advocated in Stage I, a few events with violence-related
keywords raised our suspicion. With large numbers of con-
frontations between the protestors and the police throughout
the movement, however, some protests inevitably involved
violent acts. Judging by the keywords associated with the
events, one could quickly identify a few events that were as-
sociated with violence. On Sep 24, an event associated with
keywords “pepper, spay, officer” (Figure 1 D) emerged, and
the discussion of such violent acts lasted for at least two
weeks on Twitter. There were tweets accounting for and con-
demning the violence that police used in stopping protestors
and voiced for justice [Evid.9,10]. A week after that inci-
dent, people started to report more violence via Twitter, as
shown in [Evid.11]. These kind of events attracted lots of
public attention and media coverage (Observer 2011), which
pressured NYPD to speak publicly about and investigate the
incident. More recently, on Aug 3, 2012, New York City has
reported to opt out to defend the officer pepper-spraying two
female protesters.
Another event labeled with “oakland, arrested, tear, gas”
(Figure 1 D) occurred on Jan 28, 2012 also suggested the in-
volvement of violence. The message “#OccupyOakland be-
ing teargassed smoked bombed & shot at w rubber bullets.”
has been retweeted multiple times. Later on during the event,
people tweeted “It appears that an Iraq War Veteran was
arrested #occupyoakland”, and expressed dismay in ”Mass
arrests in #Oakland. SO un-American. Sickening to watch.”
Through interactive examination of the activities through-
out the movement, one can quickly depict events that oc-
curred at different times but of similar violent nature, ascer-
taining the involvement of violence in the protests.
Stage III: Subsiding, Stabilizing and Reoccurrence
After the outbreak and rapid rise of the OM, the discussion
of domestic (U.S.) occupy activities on Twitter started to
subside significantly after the first week of Jan 2012 (shown
in Figure 1). Multiple US-based events before the sudden de-
crease were related to evictions of the Occupy encampment.
It is, therefore, reasonable to infer that the sudden drop in
tweets was due to such eviction policies. This finding is val-
idated by evidence in a recent article on a brief look back
at the Occupy Movement. After a series of evictions started
in New York City on 11-15-2011, Occupy lost its ability to
organize without places to gather (ABCNews 2012).
After the evictions, domestic Occupy activities started to
stabilize, as the general tweet volume shrunk (Figure 1).
One small climax of the Occupy activities returned on May
1, 2012 as the Occupy May Day was organized as an ef-
fort to re-energize the movement (ABCNews 2012). More
recently, activities during late August and early Septem-
ber were protests during the Republican National Conven-
tion and the Democratic National Convention (Charlotte,
NC shown as a hotspot in the map to the right). Although
the protests were organized weeks before, some were dis-
appointed in the low turnout of the participation. When the
Occupy Movement marked it first anniversary on Sep 17,
2012, many were cheerful [Evid.13], while others were not
quite happy with the progress so far [Evid.14].
DISCUSSION
To analyze the overall OM, our visual analytics system first
facilitated users to divide the movement into three major
stages based on the rise and fall of the activities. Within
each stage, users can visually select a few representative
events that are automatically discovered using the compu-
tational methods (Wang et al. 2012; Dou et al. 2012) . Due
to the page limit, we focus the discussion mainly on domes-
tic events throughout the OM. But it is worth noting that the
movement is widely spread across more than 30 countries
(as discovered in our analysis) in addition to the US. As a
matter of fact, one significant sub-event (in terms of strength
and length) detected by our system was the OccupyNigeria
(Figure 1 light green) that was widely participated in Nige-
rian because of the end of government oil subsidies.
Precision and Recall of our VA System
To validate the accuracy of our automatically extracted
events, we compared our results against the only compre-
hensive timeline of the OM available through Wikipedia
(Wikipedia 2012a; 2012b). The Wiki timeline listed 41 ma-
jor events while we have 60 events extracted from our
Occupy related tweets. Two experimenters independently
graded the accuracy of extracted events against the Wiki
timeline, producing average recall of 79%. In terms of pre-
cision, we did not limit the baseline to the Wikipedia Oc-
cupy timeline. Instead we used news media to validate the
existence of our identified events, which produced a high
precision at 95%. Despite the precision and recall results,
we acknowledge that there may be other events missed by
our detection, should there be a well-compiled timeline of
events throughout the OM. There are also cases that mul-
tiple co-occurring events appearing to be one big event in
the detection results. Therefore, more user interactions need
to be supported to allow users to refine the automatically
discovered event results. However, we believe our approach
provides a novel method to construct post-hoc diary of the
OM and lead to comprehensive understandings of the move-
ment. The system not only enables the depiction of meta-
information of the “when” and “where”, but also provides
content information regarding the scale of the event, its
lasting time period, and the responses to the event from
protestors and citizens, etc. Through presenting the case
study, we hope to showcase the capability of our computa-
tional methods and interactive visual interfaces in analyzing
and reconstructing social movements in a collective manner.
Conclusion
In this paper, we showcase a novel visual analytics system
that facilities the users to construct a collective understand-
ing of the rise and the fall of the social movements. Exem-
plified in studying the OM on Twitter, our system can ef-
fectively help users to identify different stages of the move-
ment. Through studying the events near the shifts between
the stages, it can further lead to the discovery of the proba-
ble cause for the changes. Last, examining tweets discussing
certain events, the system helps users to derive information
including who were involved, where were the hotspots, peo-
ple’s opinions, and many others alike.
References
ABCNews. 2012. A look back at the rise and fall of occupy.
http://abcn.ws/OYiVo2.
Adbusters. 2011. Occupywallstreet. http://bit.ly/n4va4T.
Christian, K. 2011. Bank transfer day.
http://www.facebook.com/Nov.Fifth.
CSMonitor. 2011. Bank transfer day: How much impact did
it have? http://bit.ly/vWaOgv.
DailyKosGroup. 2011. Marines join ows movement.
http://bit.ly/S3PuQB.
Dou, W.; Wang, X.; Skau, D.; Ribarsky, W.; and Zhou,
M. X. 2012. Leadline: Interactive visual analysis of text
data through event identification and exploration. In Visual
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), 2012 IEEE Con-
ference on.
HuffingtonPost. 2011. College sympathizers of ows walk
out of class in support. http://huff.to/pnWOmS.
Marcus, A.; Bernstein, M. S.; Badar, O.; Karger, D. R.; Mad-
den, S.; and Miller, R. C. 2011. Twitinfo: aggregating and
visualizing microblogs for event exploration. In Proceedings
of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in comput-
ing systems, CHI ’11, 227–236. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Observer. 2011. Is ray kelly’s nypd spinning out of control?
http://bit.ly/S4v6Ev.
Shamma, D.; Kennedy, L.; and Churchill, E. 2010. Conver-
sational shadows: Describing live media events using short
messages. International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media.
Wang, X.; Dou, W.; Ma, Z.; Villalobos, J.; Chen, Y.; Kraft,
T.; and Ribarsky, W. 2012. I-SI: Scalable Architecture
of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social
Media Data. Computer Graphics Forum 31(3):1275–1284.
Wikipedia. 2012a. Occupy movement. http://bit.ly/tMOGfp.
Wikipedia. 2012b. Occupy wall street timeline.
http://bit.ly/qRcMEE.

