Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)
Volume 28 (2009), Number 3
Preconceptions and Individual Differences
in Understanding Visual Metaphors
Caroline Ziemkiewicz1 and Robert Kosara1
1Charlotte Visualization Center, UNC Charlotte, USA
Abstract
Understanding information visualization is more than a matter of reading a series of data values; it is also a matter
of incorporating a visual structure into one’s own thinking about a problem. We have proposed visual metaphors
as a framework for understanding high-level visual structure and its effect on visualization use. Although there is
some evidence that visual metaphors can affect visualization use, the nature of this effect is still ambiguous. We
propose that a user’s preconceived metaphors for data and other individual differences play an important role in
her ability to think in a variety of visual metaphors, and subsequently in her ability to use a visualization. We test
this hypothesis by conducting a study in which a participant’s preconceptions and thinking style were compared
with the degree to which she is affected by conflicting metaphors in a visualization and its task questions. The
results show that metaphor compatibility has a significant effect on accuracy, but that factors such as spatial
ability and personality can lessen this effect. We also find a complex influence of self-reported metaphor preference
on performance. These findings shed light on how people use visual metaphors to understand a visualization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Information Interfaces and Presentation (HCI)
[H.5.m]: Miscellaneous—
1. Introduction
As information visualization matures, there is increasing in-
terest in developing a theory of visualization. While this
line of research has historically focused on formalization of
data encodings and developing perceptual guidelines (e.g.,
Bertin [Ber67]), we propose that using a visualization is not
simply a matter of reading data properties encoded in visual
form; rather, there are complex cognitive activities at work
that are influenced by visual structure. Using information vi-
sualization is a process of adapting information from an ex-
ternal visual structure to one’s internal conceptual structures,
and vice versa. This process can be affected in subtle ways
by the conceptual structure of a given information visualiza-
tion, as well as by the user’s individual thinking style and
preconceptions.
We have adopted a framework of visual metaphor to ad-
dress these questions of conceptual structure in information
visualization. We see visual metaphors as analogous to ver-
bal metaphors in their ability to shape information and make
sense of abstract patterns and relationships. This perspective
draws on the idea of mental models and design metaphors
from human-computer interaction, and allows us to focus on
how the visual structure of an information visualization af-
fects how a user reasons with data.
Equally important is the question of how a user’s own
conceptual structures affect her use of a visualization. Work
in cognitive science [LJ80] suggests that the conceptual
metaphors that permeate language are also used to structure
abstract thought of all kinds. This makes metaphor a poten-
tial framework to analyze not only the structure of a visual-
ization, but a user’s preconceived ideas about information.
In this work, we study how users’ preconceived structures
of information and other individual differences affect their
ability to understand visual metaphors in an information vi-
sualization. We use tree visualizations as a testbed because
of their clear spatial structure and association with similar
verbal metaphors. For example, a traditional node-link dia-
gram bears similarities to a metaphor a hierarchy is a series
of levels, and lends itself to statements about nodes in the
tree being above or below each other. A treemap, on the other
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
hand, embodies the metaphor a hierarchy is a set of nested
containers, which is reflected in statements about nodes in
a tree containing or being inside one another. We hypothe-
size that, when using a visualization, a user will internalize
its metaphors so that questions asked in a compatible verbal
metaphor will be easier to answer, while those which are in-
compatible (such as a levels question asked about data in a
treemap) will prove more difficult.
We study the degree to which a user has internalized a vi-
sual metaphor by measuring the extent to which these sets
of visual and verbal metaphors interfere with each other in
simple visualization tasks. This work builds upon the find-
ings of a previous study [ZK08] which showed that in some
cases, users showed a faster response time with questions in
a compatible metaphor. However, the ambiguity of the re-
sults in this earlier research led us to investigate the role of
individual differences in the extent to which a user adopts a
visual metaphor to her own thinking.
To this end, we examine how factors such as gender, spa-
tial reasoning ability, and self-reported metaphor preference
increase or decrease this effect. We study an online popu-
lation of users to find whether differences in these factors
can predict the ease with which a user can answer questions
about data in an incompatible verbal metaphor to the visual
metaphor of the visualization she is using. These findings
will ultimately build toward a model of how we use visual
structure to understand and reason with data.
2. Related Work
Our decision to use visual metaphor as a framework to con-
sider the higher-level cognitive effects of individual differ-
ences is motivated by work in cognitive science demon-
strating that metaphors are used to shape information on a
conceptual as well as a linguistic level. This theory is most
fully described by Lakoff and Johnson [LJ80], who argue
that metaphors in language reflect complex conceptual sys-
tems that help us understand and analyze complex abstract
topics, such as time or emotion, by structural analogy to
simpler and more concrete topic domains. These conceptual
metaphors can be implemented verbally, but they can also
be reflected in the visual presentation of information, a phe-
nomenon well-studied in the realm of advertising [MM99].
Lakoff and Johnson further distinguish structural metaphors
(e.g., time is a journey), which involve multiple related map-
pings between two conceptual domains, from ontological
metaphors (e.g., the mind is a container) and orientational
metaphors (e.g., more is up), which involve single mappings
between an abstract concept and a type of object or a spa-
tial direction. While visualizations occasionally strive to em-
body full structural metaphors [HPU98], these ontological
and orientational metaphors more commonly underly the vi-
sual metaphors of information visualization.
Further work in cognitive science has established the
effect of conceptual metaphors on thinking. Gentner and
Gentner [GG83] find that presenting users with differing
metaphors for electricity can influence their responses on
comprehension questions, suggesting that metaphors are
used in reasoning with abstract information. Tying concep-
tual metaphors more directly to visual metaphors, Gibbs and
O’Brien [GO90] show that the imagery associated with the
verbal metaphors in idioms is remarkably constant across
different people and even across different verbal metaphors
with the same underlying meaning. They go on to argue that
these mental images are constrained by their associated on-
tological conceptual metaphors. This suggests not only that
conceptual metaphors can constrain thinking, but also that
visual and verbal metaphors are fundamentally connected.
Taken together, these findings support our theory that
visual metaphors in a visualization can embody conceptual
metaphors which provide constraints and logical entailments
when working with visualized information. A previous study
by the authors [ZK08] showed that visual metaphors and
verbal metaphors can interact to affect a user’s response time
in simple tasks, and that this compatibility effect is associ-
ated with higher overall accuracy on such tasks. While this
provided initial evidence that internalizing visual metaphors
is an important part of visualization use, the variability
among participants suggests that a better understanding of
what factors drive this internalization is needed.
While there has been work on the potential role of
individual differences in visualization use, for the most part
it has focused on low-level perceptual tasks. Conati and Ma-
claren [CM08] find that a user’s perceptual speed predicts
whether a star graph or heatmap will be most effective. They
did not find an effect of other cognitive factors, including the
spatial ability factor we study in the current work. Similarly,
Allen [All00] finds a role for perceptual speed and spatial
scanning ability in search performance. Taking a more
cognitive perspective, Chen [Che00] found no effect of
spatial ability on participants’ search performance in a visu-
alization of paper citation links, but did find that users with
high spatial ability rated their tasks higher on familiarity.
Chen goes on to suggest that users with varying cognitive
abilities may be more or less likely to impose certain kinds
of mental models on data, a central question of this work.
3. Experiment
To test the role of individual differences in internalizing vi-
sual metaphors, we conducted a study to analyze potentially
important factors such as spatial ability, personality, and
metaphor preference in producing an interaction between vi-
sual and verbal metaphors in tree visualization use.
We hypothesize that participants will be faster and more
accurate on the compatible blocks, and that this effect
will be stronger for more difficult tasks. This effect will be
influenced by the Openness dimension of a participant’s per-
sonality and their spatial ability, since users with high scores
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
X
H J B
A P M
(a) Icicle plot
X
BJH
MA P
(b) Node-
link//diagram
X
B
J
H
M
A
P
(c) Radial tree
X
H
J B
A P
M
(d) Tree rings
X
H
A
P
J
B
M
(e) Treemap
Figure 1: During our pre-experiment questionnaires, we asked participants to rate five visual metaphors for hierarchies, based
on common visualizations of hierarchy data. Participants were given a description of a simple tree structure and asked to rank
these images from one to five in terms of how well they depicted the structure.
on these cognitive factors may be able to more quickly adopt
a novel visual metaphor. We further hypothesize that partic-
ipants who showed a strong self-reported preference for one
visual or verbal metaphor of hierarchies over the others will
have lower accuracy overall and be more likely to experience
interference from metaphors that conflict with their own.
3.1. Participants
63 participants were recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk web service [Ama], which allows the assignment of
simple tasks to a large population of users online. The par-
ticipants were paid a base rate of $0.50 for their participa-
tion (which took about an hour), and could receive addi-
tional bonuses for answering questions correctly, for a total
payment of up to $2.50. Participants were required to have
20/20 full color vision and be able to read and write in En-
glish. Of the participants, 40 were female and 23 were male.
Age ranged from 18 to 54 (M = 30.6).
3.2. Materials
Participants initially filled out three scales in web forms
meant to measure individual differences that may affect
their performance in the study. Personality differences
were assessed using the Mini-IPIP Big Five personality
scale [DOBL06]. This twenty-question scale rates partic-
ipants on five major personality dimensions: Openness,
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neu-
roticism. We were primarily interested in the dimension
of openness (or imagination) which measures a person’s
comfort with abstract and imaginative thinking, since we
hypothesized this might predict a user’s ability to switch
between conflicting thinking styles.
Spatial ability was measured using the Form Board test
(VZ-1) from the College Board Kit of Factor-Referenced
Cognitive Tests [EFHD76]. This is a test for the cognitive
factor known coincidentally as visualization, defined as “the
ability to manipulate or transform the image of spatial pat-
terns into other arrangements.” In this paper, we will refer to
this factor generically as “spatial ability” to avoid confusion.
In this test, users are given a target shape and a group of
smaller shapes, and asked to find a combination of the
smaller shapes that can be combined to form the target. We
chose this test because the factor matches our view of visual-
ization as a process of translating between spatial structures.
Although we used an abbreviated version of the test for
time reasons, the scores of our participant group (M =
128.6,S.D. = 42.4) were quite close to the baseline scores
reported by the College Board (M = 124.8,S.D.= 38.3).
We also developed a scale to measure a user’s preference
for levels or containers metaphors in verbal descriptions
of hierarchical relationships. Participants were given a de-
scription of a simple hierarchy, described as the department
structure of a university. This description avoided as much as
possible using strong metaphorical language in explaining
the relationships between departments (e.g., “At the College
of Humanities, there are two subdepartments: Art and
Psychology.”) Participants were then given a list of twelve
statements about the university that were worded in either a
levels or a containers metaphor, and asked to rate how well
the statements described the university’s department struc-
ture on a scale from one (Very bad description) to five (Very
good description). For example, “The Marketing department
is inside the College of Business” versus “The Marketing
department falls under the College of Business.” Finally, we
asked participants to rank their preference for five different
visual metaphors for this same hierarchical structure based
on common visualization methods (Figure 1).
During the test portion, participants answered simple
(a) Node-link condition (b) Treemap condition
Figure 2: The visualizations used in the study.
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
Containers Levels
1. Does directory H contain a deeper hierarchy than directory P? 1. Does directory H have more levels under it than directory P?
2. Does directory W contain more subdirectories than directory H? 2. Are there more subdirectories under directory W than directory H?
3. Are there more files immediately inside directory R than directory F? 3. Are there more files immediately below directory R than directory F?
4. Are both file RV and file KH within directory R? 4. Do both file RV and file KH fall under directory R?
Table 1: Examples of the four types of task questions asked during the experiment, in either a containers or levels metaphor.
The containers metaphor is thought to be compatible with a treemap visualization and the levels metaphor is compatible with
the node-link visualization. Participants saw four versions of each of these questions, with different files or folders substituted,
in each of the four study conditions, for a total of 64 task questions.
questions about a hierarchy (described as the files on a
computer hard drive) visualized as either a treemap or a
node-link diagram (Figure 2). These visualizations were
built with the InfoVis toolkit [Fek04] and used a categorical
color scheme from ColorBrewer [BH02]. Participants were
told that the colors mapped to file types, although this
information was not used in any of the task questions. The
visualizations were static and non-interactive. We generated
four hierarchical datasets to visualize, two of which were
small four-level hierarchies and two of which were more
complex eight-level hierarchies.
3.3. Procedure
After responding to the three surveys, participants began the
main study portion, which took place in a Java applet shown
on the Mechanical Turk site. Participants first had a brief
training procedure for both visualization types. In this phase,
they were asked questions similar to those in the test phase,
but were able to correct any mistaken responses until they
got it right. The order in which they were trained on the two
visualization methods was randomized. Once they answered
all of the training questions in both visualizations correctly,
they moved on to the test phase.
This phase consisted of four blocks. Each block consisted
of a visualization, either treemap or node-link, depicting a
separate dataset, and 16 questions that required the partic-
ipant to consult the visualization for information about the
data. These were yes-or-no questions, which the participants
answered by pressing either q for “yes” or p for “no.” The
questions were of four types, and the sixteen questions in a
block consisted of four groups of four questions of the same
type. The question types were worded in either a containers
or a levels metaphor (Table 1).
Each question was first displayed against a blank screen.
Once the user indicated that she had read the question by
pressing a “Done” button, the visualization appeared and
the user was given time to consult the visualization and
answer the question by striking the appropriate key on the
keyboard. We measured response time, reading time, and
accuracy for each answer.
The visualization and the verbal metaphor of the ques-
tions varied within subjects, so that the four blocks were as
follows: node-link and levels metaphor (NLL), treemap and
levels metaphor (TML), node-link and containers metaphor
(NLC), and treemap and containers metaphor (TMC). We
consider the NLL and TMC blocks to have compatible vi-
sual and verbal metaphors, while the NLC and TML blocks
have incompatible visual and verbal metaphors.
In order to measure the contribution of difficulty to the
participants’ performance on task questions, we varied the
number of levels in the four hierarchy datasets. The first
two were simple four-level hierarchies, while the second two
were larger eight-level hierarchies. We counterbalanced the
four metaphor conditions across the blocks to correct for
order effects and the potential interaction of difficulty and
compatibility.
The design of this study was influenced by lessons
learned in our previous study on the effect of visual and
verbal metaphors [ZK08]. In that work, visualization was
varied between subjects and verbal metaphors alternated
between compatible and incompatible in the same block. We
believe the task-switching costs associated with this design
may have limited our ability to clearly analyze the compat-
ibility effect. Furthermore, we found great variation in the
difficulty of the eight task questions used in that study across
the two visualization conditions, and therefore limited the
task questions in this study to the four tasks that appeared to
be close in difficulty for both treemap and nodelink users.
4. Results
We analyzed our results with a focus on how metaphor
compatibility affected response time, reading time, and
correctness of responses. We found significant effects from
a number of the individual factors which shed light on how
and why users experience metaphor interference.
4.1. Overall performance
With 63 participants responding to 64 questions each, we re-
ceived an initial total of 4032 responses. 155 cases with a
response time of less than one second were assumed to be
errors and were dropped from the final data, giving us a total
of 3877 responses. This removal does not affect the signif-
icance of any of the tests reported in this section. Response
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
N
um
be
r o
f R
es
po
ns
es
incorrect
responses
correct 
responses
2000
1500
1000
500
0
incompatible 
metaphor
compatible 
metaphor
Error bars = 95% CI
Figure 3: (a) There was an overall significant effect of
question compatibility on response correctness. Participants
were generally more likely to answer compatible questions
correctly and incompatible questions incorrectly. However,
there was no such significant difference for participants
with above-average spatial ability, participants who scored
highly on the personality dimension of Openness, or partic-
ipants who reported no verbal metaphor preference.
times ranged as high as 101.4 seconds, but we did not con-
sider any responses long enough to warrant dropping. The
mean response time was 12.19 seconds (S.D.= 9.53) and the
mean time to read a question was 3.5 seconds (S.D. = 3.6).
The reading time is likely very low because participants
would see four versions of the same question in a row, mak-
ing it unnecessary to read anything but the specific files or
folders being referenced.
4.2. Compatibility and correctness
Using Pearson’s Chi-Square, we found an overall sig-
nificant effect of metaphor compatibility on correctness,
?2(1, N = 3877) = 3.93, p < .05, confirming our primary
hypothesis that questions in a compatible metaphor are eas-
ier to answer (Figure 3). We did not find this effect in our
previous study; however, we believe that the better control
of question difficulty and condition separation in the current
study, as discussed in Section 3.3, may account for this dif-
ference. This effect is not influenced by the difficulty of the
dataset, nor was there a significant difference between the
treemap and node-link conditions.
Several individual factors influenced the extent to which
a participant showed this correctness effect. We divided par-
ticipants into Low, Average, and High Spatial Ability groups
based on their responses to the Form Board test. Low Spatial
Ability participants were defined as those with a score lower
than 86.5, or less than one standard deviation below the
average as reported by the College Board [EFHD76]), and
High Spatial Ability participants were those with a score
greater than 163.1, or greater than one standard deviation
above the average. The overall accuracy of the High Spatial
Ability group (85%) was also significantly higher than
those of the Average (79.8%) and Low (78.9%) groups,
?2(2,N = 3877) = 20, p < 0.001. However, unlike the
Low and Average groups, High Spatial Ability participants
did not show a significant difference in correctness between
compatible and incompatible questions.
Similarly, participants who scored highly on the per-
sonality dimension of Openness (defined as greater than
4.43, or one standard deviation above the population
average [DOBL06]) showed no significant difference in
correctness between compatible and incompatible ques-
tions. There was no significant correlation between spatial
ability and Openness, suggesting that they are independent
predictors of a user’s ability to translate rapidly between
conceptual metaphors.
4.3. Compatibility and response time
We did not find a significant effect of metaphor compat-
ibility on response time, although a univariate ANOVA
did find an effect of compatibility on reading time (the
time it took a participant to read the task question),
F(1,3795) = 12.99, p < .001. This may indicate a priming
effect, a common finding in psychology studies in which
one stimulus (in this case, the visual metaphor) facilitates
the processing of a subsequent related stimulus (a compat-
ible verbal metaphor). This effect may account for some
of the ambiguity of our previous study, in which we did
not distinguish between reading and response time. As in
the effect of compatibility on correctness, the difference
in reading times between compatible and incompatible
metaphors is not significant for participants in the High
Spatial Ability group. Interestingly, participants in the Low
Spatial Ability group tended to read incompatible questions
faster, although this difference in speed was not significant.
The participants in the Average Spatial Ability group most
strongly showed the main effect of compatibility on reading
time, t(1484) = 3.519, p < .001. The overall interaction
between compatibility and spatial ability for reading time
was significant, F(2,3791) = 5.24, p< .01.
4.4. Metaphor preference
We measured a participant’s verbal metaphor preference
using their ratings of how well statements described a
sample hierarchy, as described in Section 3.2. To determine
which verbal metaphor a participant preferred, we calculated
their average rating for all statements worded in a given
metaphor (either levels or containers). If the average ratings
for the two metaphor groups were equal, we considered the
participant to have a neutral self-reported verbal metaphor
preference; otherwise, she was said to have a self-reported
preference for the higher-rated verbal metaphor. To de-
termine visual metaphor preference, we simply took the
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
N
um
be
r o
f P
ar
tic
ip
an
ts 30
20
10
0
icicle
plot
node-link
diagram
radial
tree
tree
rings
treemap
Verbal Metaphor Preference
levels containers neutral
(a)
male female
(b)
30
20
10
0
male female
Visual Metaphor Preference
node-link diagram
treemap
icicle plot
radial tree
tree rings
All error bars = 95% CI
N
um
be
r o
f P
ar
tic
ip
an
ts
(c)
Figure 4: (a) While these differences are not significant, patterns of self-reported verbal metaphor preference can be seen
among participants who ranked a given visual metaphor (Figure 1) as the best depiction of a hierarchy. Contrary to our
hypothesis, users who ranked the node-link diagram highest as well as those who ranked the treemap highest tend to prefer
containers verbal metaphors. Those who ranked an icicle plot highest mostly preferred levels verbal metaphors, although this
is a small group. Non-significant but notable gender differences also emerged in self-reported metaphor preference. (b) While
women wore more likely than men to report a preference for verbal metaphors of containers, (c) they were also less likely to
choose a treemap as the best visual metaphor for a hierarchy.
highest-ranked depiction as the participant’s self-reported
preferred visual metaphor for hierarchies. We took these
self-reported preferences as a measure of the participant’s
preconceptions of hierarchical structure prior to starting
the study. While this is a simplified approximation, as it
does not consider cases where a participant’s preconceived
structure is not one of the options or is some combination
of visual metaphors, it can at least capture the user’s relative
comfort with the two visual metaphors used in the study and
visualizations related to them.
We did find some non-significant patterns of association
between self-reported verbal and visual metaphor preference
(Figure 4(a)). While a Pearson’s Chi-Square test of indepen-
dence between verbal and visual metaphor preference is not
significant, participants who ranked treemaps higher some-
what tended to prefer a containers verbal metaphor. Contrary
to our hypothesis, we did not find any association between
participants’ preferring the levels verbal metaphor and the
node-link diagram as a visual metaphor. These findings
may call into question our assumptions about which verbal
metaphors are compatible with the visualizations we use, or
suggest that the correspondence between verbal and visual
metaphors is indirect. Further study is needed to reliably
determine the conceptual metaphors of a given visualization.
There were some gender-related patterns in these mea-
sures of self-reported preference. Women were more likely
than men to prefer containers metaphors (Figure 4(b)),
although this effect is not significant. However, women also
non-significantly tended to rank the treemap lower in their
preferred visual metaphors (Figure 4(c)). We also found
a significant effect that participants with higher spatial
ability rated all verbal descriptions lower (that is, there is
a negative correlation between spatial ability and overall
verbal description rating, R(57) = ?0.29, p < 0.05),
suggesting a potential dichotomy between a comfort with
spatial and verbal thinking.
4.5. Preference and performance
The connection between self-reported metaphor preference
and performance in the test portion was weaker than
the effects of other individual differences, and showed
a surprising gender effect. While we hypothesized that
participants would generally perform faster for questions in
their preferred metaphor, we found this effect only applied
to women. An ANOVA on response time found a signif-
icant interaction between self-reported verbal metaphor
preference, gender, and the metaphor of the question,
F(2,3481) = 10.38, p < .001. While women who reported
a preference for one verbal metaphor over another had
significantly faster response times in that metaphor, men
had significantly faster response times on levels questions no
matter what their self-reported verbal metaphor preference
(Figure 5). However, we did find that participants with a self-
reported neutral verbal metaphor preference did not show
a significant compatibility effect on correctness, providing
evidence for our hypothesis that a preconceived metaphor
for hierarchies leads to a greater compatibility effect.
We did not find a significant effect of self-reported vi-
sual metaphor preference on correctness or response time
across the two visualization types. That is, users who ranked
treemaps the highest out of all visual metaphors did not re-
spond more correctly or faster to questions in the treemap
condition, and likewise for users who ranked node-link
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
Self-Reported Verbal Metaphor Preference
M
ea
n 
R
es
po
ns
e 
Ti
m
e 
(in
 s
ec
on
ds
)
levels neutral containers levels neutral containers
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Male Participants (N = 23) Female Participants (N = 40)
Question Metaphor
levels
containers
Figure 5: While we expected users to respond faster to questions in their self-reported preferred verbal metaphor, this pattern
only emerged for women. Men responded significantly faster to levels questions no matter what their self-reported metaphor
preference. Women who did not prefer one verbal metaphor over another tended to respond faster to containers questions.
diagrams the highest. Similarly, although women ranked
treemaps lower consistently, there were no significant gen-
der differences in correctness or response time in either the
treemap condition or the nodelink condition.
4.6. Other factors
There was no significant difference in accuracy between
the node-link and the treemap conditions, although response
times in the treemap condition (M = 11.6,S.D. = 8.5)
were significantly faster than in the node-link condi-
tion (M = 12.7,S.D. = 10.4) by a small amount,
t(3875) = 3.496, p < .001. There was no signifi-
cant difference in accuracy or response time between
the two verbal metaphors. Unsurprisingly, responses
to the small four-level hierarchies were significantly
faster (t(3875) = 36.8, p < .001) and more accurate
(?2(1,N = 3877) 4.4, p< 0.05) than responses to the eight-
level hierarchies. We did not find any significant differences
in the compatibility effects between the small and large hi-
erarchy conditions.
5. Discussion
Our results suggest a number of expected and unexpected
interpretations of how individual differences contribute
to the role of visual metaphors in using a visualization.
While metaphor compatibility does influence how well a
user can perform on visualization tasks, this influence can
be lessened in cases where the user is more inclined to
spatial or imaginative thinking, or where the user does not
have a strong prior metaphor preference. We further discuss
these effects in the areas of overall metaphor compatibility,
gender effects, and the relationship between preference and
performance.
5.1. Metaphor compatibility
The effect of metaphor compatibility on reading time and
correctness suggests that verbal and visual metaphors are
significant factors in a user’s comprehension of a visualiza-
tion task. We posit that during the time a user is working
with a given visualization, she will try to adapt her thinking
to its metaphorical structure. Questions that do not easily fit
into that structure will be more difficult to understand, which
manifests itself in the time she takes to read the question as
well as her ability to answer it correctly.
However, this work also makes it clear that this adapt-
ing to a visual metaphor does not always take place. Users
with high spatial ability, for instance, may find it easier to
translate between the implicit spatial structure of the task
question and the spatial structure of the visualization, while
those with more imaginative thinking styles (indicated by
the Openness personality dimension) are more comfortable
thinking in several modes at once.
5.2. Gender
The gender effects in self-reported metaphor preference
were intriguing, and may be related to known gender differ-
ences in spatial and verbal abilities. The implication that men
and women may approach visualization with different pre-
conceptions and thinking styles certainly bears further study.
One potential factor that we did not consider in this study
is verbal ability. It is possible that verbal comprehension
skills may play a part in the influence of verbal metaphors
on a user’s thinking process, and it is a common finding that
women have higher scores than men on tests of verbal abil-
ity [Hal00]. These findings are a clear call to ensure balanced
gender distribution in visualization evaluations, particularly
ones which use novel visual metaphors that may interfere
with a user’s preconceptions.
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ziemkiewicz and Kosara / Preconceptions and Individual Differences
5.3. Preconceptions
The interaction between stated metaphor preference and
task performance is not as clear-cut as we expected. Users
who prefer a visual metaphor do not always perform better
with a visualization that uses that metaphor, suggesting
that preconceived conceptual metaphors do not strongly
influence a user’s ability to adopt a novel visual metaphor.
Although the effect of verbal metaphor preference is
similarly ambiguous, it is of interest that participants who
show no preference for either of the verbal metaphors are
more likely to answer compatible and incompatible ques-
tions with equal accuracy. This suggests that, although the
visual metaphor seems to dominate while one is using a vi-
sualization, it is through verbal metaphors that a participant’s
preconceptions are more clearly discovered.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
Our work suggests the need to take individual differences
among users into account when designing and evaluating vi-
sualization systems. We provide evidence that these differ-
ences go beyond low-level perceptual effects to influence a
user’s conceptual structures of information.
These findings imply a need to better understand the needs
of individual users when designing visualization methods,
not just at the level of visual properties such as size and
color, but also when crafting the visual metaphors that drive
a visualization’s overall design. The mismatch between ini-
tial preference and performance suggests that this isn’t just
a matter of designing to the user’s preconceived metaphors,
although that may play a part in how the user will formulate
questions and ideas about the data.
The differences in gender, spatial ability, and personality
should also be considered when evaluating systems. An un-
balanced or insufficiently large participant population may
skew the results of even high-level tasks. At the same time,
these differences may help to account for some of the incon-
sistencies among existing visualization evaluations.
More work is needed to place the results of this research in
a broader context. In particular, a study of the role of verbal
ability on the effect of metaphor compatibility may clarify
the gender differences we found. It would also be useful to
examine how verbal and visual metaphor preferences behave
for other types of data than tree visualizations. While tree
visualization has the advantage of being highly structured
and therefore associated with strong spatial metaphors, these
findings must be generalized.
Although we did not have enough non-native English
speakers in our population to study the role of language in
metaphor effects, a more focused study may be able to shed
light on this factor. For example, cognitive science studies
have found differences between native English and native
Chinese speakers in spatial metaphors for time; exploring
the effect of this difference on time-series visualizations may
uncover another significant area of individual difference.
Ultimately, we wish to fit this work into a broader model
of how people use the visual metaphors of a visualization
to think about and reason with information. This model sees
visualization as a tool for externalizing thought processes
and shaping the user’s thinking in turn. Since we are dealing
with a close interaction between cognition and visualization,
the individual thinking style of a given user is likely to play
a large part in the success and particular character of this
process. In the end, understanding how visualization works
for particular kinds of users will help us to understand the
process of visualization itself.
References
[All00] ALLEN B.: Individual differences and the conundrums of
user-centered design: Two experiments. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science 51, 6 (2000), 508–520.
[Ama] Amazon Mechanical Turk, http://aws.amazon.com/mturk/.
Retrieved 10-16-2008.
[Ber67] BERTIN J.: Semiology of Graphics. Univ. of Wisconsin
Press, 1967.
[BH02] BREWER C., HARROWER M.: ColorBrewer,
http://www.colorbrewer.org/, 2002. Retrieved 12-4-2008.
[Che00] CHEN C.: Individual differences in a spatial-semantic
virtual environment. Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science 51, 6 (2000), 529–542.
[CM08] CONATI C., MACLAREN H.: Exploring the role of in-
dividual differences in information visualization. In Advanced
Visual Interfaces (2008), ACM Press.
[DOBL06] DONNELLAN M. B., OSWALD F. L., BAIRD B. M.,
LUCAS R. E.: TheMini-IPIP scales: Tiny-yet-effective measures
of the Big Five factors of personality. Psychological Assessment
18, 2 (2006), 192–203.
[EFHD76] ECKSTROM R. B., FRENCH J. W., HARMAN H. H.,
DERMAN D.: Kit of factor-referenced cognitive tests. Educa-
tional Testing Service, Princeton, NJ, 1976.
[Fek04] FEKETE J.-D.: The InfoVis Toolkit. In Proceedings In-
formation Visualization (2004), IEEE CS Press, pp. 167–174.
[GG83] GENTNER D., GENTNER D. R.: Mental Models.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1983, ch. Flowing Waters or
Teeming Crowds: Mental Models of Electricity, pp. 99–129.
[GO90] GIBBS R. W., O’BRIEN J. E.: Idioms and mental im-
agery: the metaphorical motivation for idiomatic meaning. Cog-
nition 36, 1 (1990), 35–68.
[Hal00] HALPERN D. F.: Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2000.
[HPU98] HORN W., POPOW C., UNTERASINGER L.: Metaphor
graphics to visualize ICU data over time. In Intelligent Data
Analysis in Medicine and Pharmacology (IDAMAP-98) (1998).
[LJ80] LAKOFF G., JOHNSON M.: Metaphors We Live By. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1980.
[MM99] MCQUARRIE E. F., MICK D. G.: Visual rhetoric in
advertising: Text-interpretive, experimental, and reader-response
analyses. Journal of Consumer Research 26, 1 (1999), 37–54.
[ZK08] ZIEMKIEWICZ C., KOSARA R.: The shaping of infor-
mation by visual metaphors. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 14, 6 (2008), 1269–1276.
c© 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c© 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

