Interactive Coordinated Multiple-View Visualization of
Biomechanical Motion Data
Daniel F. Keefe, Member, IEEE, Marcus Ewert, Student Member, IEEE,
William Ribarsky, Senior Member, IEEE, and Remco Chang, Member, IEEE
Abstract— We present an interactive framework for exploring space-time and form-function relationships in experimentally collected
high-resolution biomechanical data sets. These data describe complex 3D motions (e.g. chewing, walking, flying) performed by
animals and humans and captured via high-speed imaging technologies, such as biplane fluoroscopy. In analyzing these 3D biome-
chanical motions, interactive 3D visualizations are important, in particular, for supporting spatial analysis. However, as researchers in
information visualization have pointed out, 2D visualizations can also be effective tools for multi-dimensional data analysis, especially
for identifying trends over time. Our approach, therefore, combines techniques from both 3D and 2D visualizations. Specifically, it uti-
lizes a multi-view visualization strategy including a small multiples view of motion sequences, a parallel coordinates view, and detailed
3D inspection views. The resulting framework follows an overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand style of analysis, and
it explicitly targets a limitation of current tools, namely, supporting analysis and comparison at the level of a collection of motions rather
than sequential analysis of a single or small number of motions. Scientific motion collections appropriate for this style of analysis exist
in clinical work in orthopedics and physical rehabilitation, in the study of functional morphology within evolutionary biology, and in
other contexts. An application is described based on a collaboration with evolutionary biologists studying the mechanics of chewing
motions in pigs. Interactive exploration of data describing a collection of more than one hundred experimentally captured pig chewing
cycles is described.
Index Terms—Scientific visualization, information visualization, coordinated multiple views, biomechanics.
1 INTRODUCTION
Effective visualization of 3D motion is a complex problem, especially
as it relates to experimentally collected data in biomechanics. Imag-
ing modalities, such as biplane fluoroscopy combined with CT, are
now able to capture high-speed motion of the bones of a joint at rates
of 250 to 500 frames per second with sub-millimeter accuracy [1, 22].
These data allow for far more detailed studies of a variety of complex
motions in animals and humans than were previously possible. Sev-
eral important visualization challenges arise from working with mo-
tion data sets collected with these technologies.
The first challenge in visualization and analysis of these data is un-
derstanding the complex spatial relationships that are present. This is
a 3D problem, in the sense that the bones exist in a 3D space and, in
many cases, the relationship between the 3D shape of the bones and
their function (functional morphology) is one of the primary scientific
research questions. Thus, effective 3D spatial understanding is an im-
portant feature of visualization systems appropriate for use with these
data.
The second challenge in analysis of these motion data is that, in
both clinical and experimental work, these data typically exist as part
of a large database. For example, when a scientist designs an exper-
iment to study chewing motions (the primary example used in this
paper) she will typically collect data on tens to hundreds of chewing
cycles. Questions posed during analysis may be of the form, what is a
typical chewing motion as exhibited across the data? Or, they may be
of the form, how does chewing change based upon the amount of food
in the mouth, the type of food, or other variables? This style of analy-
sis requires understanding the time-varying spatial data that describes
a single chewing motion, and, beyond that, it requires understanding
• Daniel F. Keefe and Marcus Ewert are with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering at the University of Minnesota. E-mails:
keefe@cs.umn.edu, ewert@cs.umn.edu.
• William Ribarsky and Remco Chang are with The Charlotte Visualization
Center, UNC Charlotte, E-mails: ribarsky@uncc.edu, rchang@uncc.edu.
Manuscript received 31 March 2008; accepted 1 August 2008; posted online
19 October 2008; mailed on 13 October 2008.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mailto:tvcg@computer.org.
trends and anomalies in this time-varying spatial data across a collec-
tion of numerous repeated motions.
Previous approaches to visualization of biomechanical motion data
have benefited from animated and interactively controlled 3D graph-
ics [8, 10, 21]. Our collaborators in evolutionary biology have also
had positive experiences with 3D visualization of their data. In fact,
several of them have found 3D views to be so useful that they have
taught themselves how to use a combination of Maya and Matlab to
produce their own 3D visualizations. In general, previous 3D visu-
alizations presented in the literature have provided useful capabilities
for investigating individual motions, but provided only limited capa-
bilities for analysis and comparison of a set of motions. We present
a framework that explicitly supports visualization of multiple related
motion sequences, an important scientific task in this context.
Visualization of trends in time-varying and multi-variate data has
a rich history of study within the information visualization commu-
nity [16]. Our work is motivated by a desire to leverage the theories
and techniques resulting from this work and bring these to bear within
a system that targets time-varying 3D data. Since spatial relationships
in biomechanical motion data are so important, they have tended to be
visualized in the past with what have traditionally been termed scien-
tific visualization techniques, or 3D spatial layouts where the spatial
arrangement is pre-determined by the true 3D arrangement of bones
in space. To observe motion over time, these 3D views have been ani-
mated, and often additional data attributes are visualized via color, tex-
ture, streamlines, and 3D data glyphs [8, 10, 21]. While these sophisti-
cated 3D views are clearly valuable, evidence in the information visu-
alization literature suggests that, in general, understanding trends over
time through animation may not be the most effective strategy [16].
Based on this insight and other promising results in information visu-
alization [3, 11, 15], we have been motivated to explore a new visu-
alization framework that combines the strengths of both information
and scientific visualization approaches and targets understanding of
spatially complex, time-varying motion data.
The idea of bringing information and scientific visualization to-
gether is not new [7, 14], and several compelling examples tied to real
scientific analysis now exist in the literature [12, 13, 19]. However,
many challenges remain in this line of research, especially as it relates
to specific forms of data. Analysis of detailed 3D motion, for exam-
ple, raises the question of the most appropriate roles for animation,
Fig. 1. When data are first loaded into the visualization framework, an overview of the motion database is presented using three coordinated data
views: 1. A small multiples view generated from snapshots of 3D renderings (top-left window in the figure). 2. A parallel coordinates view (top-
right), data dimensions plotted in this example are: trial number, chew cycle number, cycle duration, average angular velocity for the cycle, average
translational velocity for the cycle, average distance of separation of the teeth for the cycle, then frame number and the same set of descriptive
statistics but calculated at the single frame level rather than as averages over a cycle. 3. A 2D plot of data values over time (bottom), here angular
velocity over time. All views are linked through both visual and interactive strategies. In this case, 108 chewing motions cycles from five different
trials are displayed in this overview.
comparison views, and techniques such as parallel coordinates, which
have been widely applied in general, but less so within the context of
biomechanical analysis.
Specific to analysis of 3D biomechanical motion data, integrating
3D and 2D visualization techniques, as in the overview visualization
of Figure 1, is particularly appealing because each brings a unique
strength that compensates for the other’s weakness. Analyzing motion
trends using only 3D visualization tools imposes a high cognitive load
on the user, since analysis often requires comparisons between mul-
tiple detailed motions that the user must keep in his working mem-
ory [9, 16]. On the other hand, when analyzing motion using only 2D
visualizations, the abstract representations of the motion data do not
provide the necessary context for the user to understand the 3D struc-
ture of the object or its movement in space. We propose that when the
two are integrated together in a tightly-coupled manner, the user may
gain the benefit of both perspectives, leading to improved analysis ca-
pabilities.
The high-level contribution of our work is presenting an integrated
framework for 2D and 3D interactive visualization of experimentally
collected biomechanical motion data sets. Specific contributions of
the work are: 1. The design of an overview technique for visualizing
hundreds of repeated cyclic motions. 2. Methods for zooming, filter-
ing, and exploring motion data via linked 2D and 3D views, including
the ability to pass data generated through interaction with 3D views
on to linked 2D visualizations, and vice versa. 3. The design of side-
by-side and overlay-style coordinated views for comparing multiple
related motions and surface-to-surface interactions. 4. A discussion of
lessons learned, current limitations, and future directions as motivated
by a driving real-world application.
In the following section, we provide some background on the data
and scientific application (analysis of pig chewing behavior) discussed
in this paper. This is followed by a discussion of related work in vi-
sualization. Then we present the motion visualization framework in
detail, followed by more specifics of the driving application and ini-
tial feedback from domain scientists. Finally, we present a discussion
of lessons learned in developing this system, including limitations and
future directions.
2 BACKGROUND IN APPLICATION AREA AND DATA
The framework presented here is likely to apply to analysis of a num-
ber of experimentally-captured motions of interest to orthopedists,
physical therapists, and evolutionary biologists. The example applica-
tion driving the work in this paper comes from the field of evolutionary
biology, where our collaborators are studying mastication in minipigs
(Sinclair strain).
In general, the mechanics of the mandible, skull, and teeth working
together in chewing motions are an interesting area of study, both in
humans [6], and in animals [8]. Pigs, in particular, follow an unusual
chewing pattern, called bilateral chewing, that is characterized by mo-
tion of the jaw up, then a sideways food grinding motion to the left,
then down, then up, grinding to the right, then down. This alternat-
ing side-to-side pattern tends to repeat over several chewing cycles.
(The pattern can be seen in the tracer paths in adjacent small multi-
ples views in Figure 2.) This characteristic motion has been visualized
previously [8], but only for investigating a single chewing motion at
a time. Research questions require analysis of multiple instances of
this motion (an important goal of this framework). For example: Can
we catalog a “typical” chewing behavior? How does the movement of
bones change over time based upon the amount of food in the mouth
or the type of food?
Evolutionary biologists began their study by collecting data from
multiple experimental trials in the lab. The trials captured motion from
a number of different chewing-related behaviors, including food gath-
ering, feeding on pig chow, and feeding on hard nuts (in the shell).
Data were captured and processed using the X-Ray Reconstruction
of Moving Morphology (XROMM) methodology [1], in which high-
speed biplane fluoroscopy is used to capture motion data during the
experiment and a CT scan captured separately is used to reconstruct
the 3D geometry of the bones and teeth. Computational tools are uti-
Fig. 2. A small multiples display setup interactively by a user. To tune the display, the user zooms in to one of the small views, making an interactive
3D rendering of it fill the window. Then, he adjusts visualization and camera settings in the zoomed in view. When he returns to the small multiples
view, each of the multiples is re-rendered using the new visualization settings. In this case, the user added a tracer curve to the visualization to
trace out the path of the pig’s front tooth. Then, he zoomed in on the location of the tooth and made the bones invisible. The characteristic bilateral
chewing motion of the pig may be seen in many of the adjacent images. Look for a tracer that begins (black end of the curve) on one side, moves
up, then comes down on the other side. In the image immediately to the left or right of this one, you are likely to find a tracer that exhibits a similar
pattern, but moving in the opposite direction. Cycles that capture food gathering behavior can also be identified in the display, characterized by
tracers that are more compact than the elongated chewing motions. The background color for each multiple is set to encode the trial from which
the data are drawn; the colors correspond to those used in the 2D time plot at the bottom of the screen (see Figure 1). Note: to better understand
how the tracers were created, see the 3D view in Figure 3, which shows the bones together with a tracer placed in the same position as was used
to generate these small multiples renderings.
lized to register the two sources together to reconstruct high-speed 3D
motion data. These data are the source for the visualizations presented
here. For this study, they include more than one hundred chewing mo-
tions (up-down cycles of the jaw) collected during five experimental
trials.
3 RELATED WORK
In this section, we relate our work to relevant research in evaluat-
ing animated visualization as a tool for trend analysis, visualizing 3D
biomechanics, designing coordinated multi-view visualizations, and
combining scientific and information visualization strategies.
3.1 Trend Analysis and Animated Visualization
In recent work, Robertson et al. examined the effectiveness of ani-
mation for visualizing trends in data [16]. While animation is often
attractive for presentation purposes, the results of this work suggest
that static small multiples views and static traces of trend lines over
time may be more effective than animation in analysis of trends over
time.
These findings have far reaching implications for visualizations
of motion data, which are, nearly by default, viewed as animations.
While viewing an animated visualization of the motion of an animal
does seem natural and intuitive (after all the data are collected over
time) the question is raised, are animated visualizations the right tool
for analyzing these motion data?
Based upon our experience with collaborators and the results of
previous animated 3D visualizations in biomechanics, we believe in-
teractive/animated 3D visualizations do play some important role in
analysis. However, the findings of Robertson et al. highlight the po-
tential importance of alternative complementary techniques and raise
the issue of identifying the right mix of animated and static views for
motion visualization. Our framework explores these issues and builds
upon the static representations demonstrated by Robertson et al. A
key component of our initial motion overview visualization is a small
multiples visualization [20], which we have often found useful to con-
struct as a set of tracer lines (See Figure 2), following in the style of
the small multiples traces presented in [16].
3.2 3D Biomechanics Visualization
Several systems for 3D visualization of biomechanics data exist in the
literature [2, 8, 10, 21]. A primary function of these tools is provid-
ing a view of anatomical features (e.g. bones, ligaments) positioned
appropriately in 3D space. Almost all of these systems also support
some form of motion playback, often with some interactive support
for adjusting camera parameters and playback speed.
Beyond simply replaying experimentally captured data, 3D visu-
alization systems also provide for visualization of derived data. For
example, computing helical (or screw) axes to describe the motion of
one bone relative to another is a technique that is gaining popularity
within the biomechanics community [4, 6]. Viewing the position of
this axis in space relative to anatomical landmarks in a 3D visualiza-
tion can provide insight into the rotation and translational components
of a complex motion [8, 21]. Other examples of 3D visualization of
these data include applying color maps to bone surfaces to indicate the
distance from one bone to another [10], and drawing 3D tracer curves
to indicate the path some anatomical feature takes through space over
time [2]. Our 3D visualizations employ each of these techniques. The
focus of our investigation is not on the introduction of novel 3D visu-
alization techniques, but rather on how a state-of-the-art 3D visualiza-
tion of biomechanics may be leveraged within a system that interac-
tively links it with complementary 2D visualizations.
3.3 Multi-View and “Scientific-Information” Visualization
The benefits of using multiple coordinated 2D visualizations for data
analysis have been well documented [3, 11, 15].
Our approach relates most closely to multi-view techniques that
employ a combination of 2D and 3D views to investigate data that
follow a pre-defined spatial distribution, thereby combining scientific
and information visualization techniques. Several visualization and
interaction techniques fitting this description have been documented
previously, for example, linking 2D and 3D scatterplots [13], brush-
ing over multiple dimensions in 2D views to identify 3D features [12],
and using parallel coordinates as an interface for exploratory volume
visualization [19]. Our work follows closely in the spirit of these tech-
niques, however, our overview visualization, coordinated views, and
use of animation and interaction are designed specifically to target
analysis of high-precision motion data sets. As such, we have a spe-
cial emphasis on the role of animation within our framework, and we
have utilized specific properties of the data, such as its cyclic nature,
in designing several components of the framework, such as the small
multiples overview.
4 MOTION VISUALIZATION FRAMEWORK
In this section, we describe a novel framework for visualization of sci-
entific 3Dmotion data. Through a series of visual tools, the framework
supports the typical visual information seeking mantra: “Overview
first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand” [17].
4.1 Small Multiples and Coordinated Views for a Motion
Database Overview
When a data set is first loaded, an overview of the data is displayed
using the three coordinated view windows seen in Figure 1: a small
multiples view, a parallel coordinates view, and a 2D xy-plot. These
three views have been carefully chosen for their analytical capabilities
in interpreting different aspects of a 3D motion sequence. The small
multiples view displays a representative motion snapshot for each mo-
tion sequence. The 2D xy-plot is chosen for its intuitive nature in rep-
resenting time, described by Ericson during his keynote address in the
2007 InfoVis conference [5]. Lastly, the parallel coordinates view is
used to reveal relationships between data variables, including motion
statistics and derived quantities. Together, these views allow the user
to explore the 3Dmotion sequence in space, time, and at a dimensional
level.
4.1.1 3D Snapshot Small Multiples View
The utility of small multiples displays for analysis of trends over time
has been demonstrated in a 2D data context [16], but several open
questions remain in developing a small multiples strategy for 3D mo-
tion data. Relevant full-scale 3D visualizations are typically interac-
tive and detailed. How do these translate to small scales? If the in-
dividual multiples are to support the same style of interaction as in
normal visualization, then how do the interaction strategies change to
work within a much smaller window? Several questions that are spe-
cific to motion visualization also arise, including, how are motions
assigned to a small multiple? One small multiple per frame of the mo-
tion data will result in far too many views to be useful. On the other
hand, if a single multiple stands in for a sequence of frames in the
data, then how does that single image best visually represent motion
over time?
Our approach to assigning motion to a particular small multiples
image is based upon a characteristic of our target data. The biological
motions we examine (e.g. chewing, walking, flying) are almost always
cyclic. It is quite common to segment motions such as these into cycles
as a part of the analysis. In walking, the moment the foot first touches
the floor can be used as an indicator of the beginning and end of a
single stride. In the chewing examples presented here, the motions
are divided into segments of chewing patterns (a single up and down
motion of the jaw bone). One motion segment is assigned to each
small multiple image.
The image displayed for each small multiple is a snapshot of a 3D
visualization generated using our typical 3D rendering engine and then
texture mapped onto a small rectangle to produce a grid of many mul-
tiples that can be rendered at high frame rates. The default view when
data are first loaded into the system is shown in Figure 1. Here, each
multiple is a snapshot of a 3D rendering of the bones posed during the
initial frame of each motion segment. The user tunes the display by
first clicking on one of the small multiples. This enlarges the render-
ing to fill its parent window, hiding the other small multiples. At a
larger size, the 3D view is now easier to manipulate. The display now
switches into an interactive 3D rendering mode and activates typical
mouse and keyboard-based interaction widgets for camera manipula-
tion, showing and hiding particular bones within the view, and adding
visualization glyphs such as axes of rotation and tracer lines to the
view. After some manipulation of these viewing parameters, the user
escapes from the large interactive view and is returned to the small
multiples display, which is then re-rendered so that all of the views
match the camera and visualization settings set by the user in the in-
teractive mode. The background color of each multiple is set to encode
the trial from which the data come; the colors correspond to those in
the 2D time plot (see bottom of Figure 1).
Figure 2 shows a small multiples display generated in this way. In
the interactive mode, the user attached a tracer to the front tooth on the
jaw, zoomed the camera in to focus on the tooth, turned off the render-
ing of the bones, and then returned to the small multiples display.
4.1.2 Integrated 2D Plot and Parallel Coordinates View
Accompanying the small multiples display in the overview visualiza-
tion are two 2D views: a parallel coordinates visualization and a xy-
plot. All the views are linked together via interactive brushing and
highlighting. For example, as the mouse moves over the time axis
in the 2D xy-plot, the corresponding small multiple view highlights.
Conversely, moving the mouse over a small multiple image highlights
the corresponding section of the time plot. Each line in the parallel
coordinates view corresponds to a frame of motion data. Brushing
over data in the parallel coordinates view highlights the corresponding
frames and data values in the xy-plot. The axis of the xy-plot may be
adjusted to map to any data attribute that may be calculated for each
frame of the data. In practice, values such as angular or translational
velocity for a particular bone are useful. The angular velocity of the
rotation of the mandible is plotted over time in the view shown in Fig-
ure 1.
4.2 Filtering to Generate Zoomed-In Coordinated Views
Following Shneiderman’s mantra “overview first, zoom and filter, then
details-on-demand,” the system supports filtering down to specific seg-
ments or time ranges of the motion sequence. In the small multiples
overview, a right mouse click on an image activates a menu, which
is used to create a new coordinated view filtered to display just the
segment of the motion that corresponds to the small multiple. Simi-
larly, after brushing with the mouse to select a portion of the data in
the time plot view, a right click and menu selection sends the selected
data to a new multi-view zoomed-in window. Figure 3 shows this new
zoomed-in window.
4.2.1 Interaction Between Views
The zoomed-in window contains three data views: the parallel coordi-
nates plot, 2D xy-plot, and a new interactive 3D view. Both 2D views
are similar to the overview versions with the exception that the data
visualized is a subset of the original data. The 3D view is different
from the overview. Rather than a small multiples representation, spa-
tial trends are now depicted via a real-time 3D rendering of the data
that is responsive to mouse and keyboard controls for adjusting view-
ing and visualization parameters. All views are linked visually and in-
teractively. For example, the 3D view may be animated either through
Fig. 3. A coordinated multiple view window created by zooming in on a
portion of the larger data set.
interaction in the 3D view or by mousing over the 2D time plot. In ei-
ther case, the views advance together to display the active data frame
as the animation plays. The 2D plot is not restricted to depicting time
on the X axis. Other plots, for example, angular velocity vs. distance
between bones, are also useful.
4.2.2 Generating and Visualizing Data through Exploration
A more interesting example of the tight linkage between these multi-
ple views is the ability to seed new visualizations from data generated
during analysis. Figure 4 illustrates an example of this. The user first
filtered the data from the original overview to zoom in to a sequence
of four main chewing patterns. Then, while interacting with the 3D
view window, a tracer was created to mark the path of a point on the
left condyle of the mandible. The path that this point travels through
space is calculated and stored in a coordinate system relative to the
pig’s skull. The 3D points that make up the path then become avail-
able as a data source for the linked 2D views. In this example, the user
brushed over high positive values for the vertical position (relative to
the pig’s skull) of the tracer using the parallel coordinates view. The
white lines in this view show the highlighted data points. Since the
views are linked, these values also highlight in yellow within the plot
below of average distance between the teeth over time. The visualiza-
tion shows that during jaw closing, the selected point on the condyle
rotates backward and downward. At its low point, there is some side-
to-side motion of the jaw as the teeth come together to grind food. The
sideways motion is visible in the tracer shown in the 3D view.
Other 3D visualization systems have exported data generated dur-
ing exploration to tools that may then be used to generate related 2D
plots [8]. Important differences in the strategy described here are the
tight coupling of the multiple views and the ability to build new views
based upon data generated during exploration. A tracer placed in one
view may generate data that are then used for exploration via interac-
tive brushing and ultimately for a new filtering strategy. Then, based
on this new filtering, a second zoomed-in coordinated view may be
created.
Fig. 4. The tracer created in the 3D view window generates new data
(x,y,z points over time) that become available for display in the other
linked views.
4.3 Overlays and Side-by-Sides for Detailed Comparisons
Visual comparison of motion sequences occurs at all levels of the
framework, and as the focus narrows, the method of visual comparison
changes. As noted by Robertson et al. [16], small multiples (or side-
by-side windows) and overlays each have advantages in comparing
motion. The advantage in using overlays is that “counter trends” are
easily detectable, but overlays often suffer from visual clutter. On the
other hand, side-by-side comparisons are less sensitive to visual clut-
ter, but require more visual real estate to represent the same amount of
information and require more time in visual scanning of all the win-
dows. In this framework, the choice of the most appropriate mix of
these styles of comparison is left to the user.
In motion overlay views, data for multiple sequences are plotted
and rendered together. Figure 5 shows an example. Note that, even in
the 3D view, the pig is rendered with two superimposed jaw bones, one
corresponding to each of the motion sequences that is being visualized.
Side-by-side comparisons may be established informally by sim-
ply arranging zoomed-in coordinated views side-by-side on the screen.
Alternatively, data selected in a time plot within the motion overview
or any zoomed-in window may also be sent to an existing window,
which then resizes to arrange the views appropriately for a side-by-
side comparison, as in Figure 6.
5 APPLICATION TO EXPERIMENTALLY COLLECTED BIOME-
CHANICS DATA
This section describes application-specific implementation details, ini-
tial findings, and feedback from domain scientists for the study of pig
chewing behavior introduced in section 2.
5.1 Processing Motion Data
Before loading the pig chewing motion data into the visualization
framework, a simpleMatlab script was prepared to segment the motion
into cycles. While, more advanced time series analysis could certainly
be utilized in this step, the approach taken here is quite simple. The
angular velocity of the jaw bone is already calculated for these data
in a preprocessing step. Using this information, a sign change from
negative to positive in the angular velocity is detected. This occurs
Fig. 5. Detailed motion comparisons are supported via overlay-style vi-
sualization applied to each of the coordinated views. Data from multiple
motion segments are plotted on the same axes and in the same regis-
tered 3D space to produce these visualizations.
regularly at the bottom of a chewing motion when the jaw stops open-
ing and begins to close. The data frames where this occurs are saved to
a file and loaded into the visualization system to seed the techniques,
such as the small multiples display, that work based on segments of
the motion data. In all, data from five different trials are loaded into
the system resulting in 108 motion segments identified in this manner.
All this data can be seen in the motion overview in Figure 1. Note that
not all of the sequences correspond to a chewing cycle, some refer to
food gathering. The small multiples view in Figure 2 provides a visual
means for distinguishing chewing and food gathering patterns.
5.2 Identifying Spatial Relationships and Surface Interac-
tions
Many biomechanical analyses require investigation of patterns in the
interaction of surfaces, particularly bone-to-bone surface interaction
within joints [10]. Chewing motions are interesting in this regard in
that there are three areas of surface-to-surface interaction: the attach-
ment of the jaw to the skull on the left and on the right, and the teeth.
The occlusion and grinding patterns of the teeth are of particular in-
terest. Figure 6 shows a series of zoomed-in data views setup as a
side-by-side comparison. The vertical distance between the teeth has
been calculated and plotted directly on the 3D view as a color map
textured to the tooth geometry. These distance data are calculated for
each frame of the motion in a preprocessing step and are rendered in-
teractively in the 3D views using a texture-based color map implemen-
tation. Within this framework, these data may be viewed both in the
3D visualization and in 2D plots, where the average distance between
the two sets of teeth is a useful variable to explore.
5.3 Identifying Clusters of Related Motion Sequences
Figure 7 demonstrates the use of multiple linked views for identify-
ing and characterizing related motion sequences. The user has filtered
down to a subset of the data (eleven chew sequences) that are visible
in the parallel coordinates view and the 2D plot of average distance
between teeth vs. frame number. The 2D plot has been arranged to
overlay the chewing sequences, starting each at frame zero on the left
side of the plot. In this arrangement, two similar clusters of motions
are easily distinguishable, with an outlier that does not clearly fit into
either pattern. Each cluster is likely to correspond to a different chew-
ing behavior, for example, chewing and food gathering. Using the 2D
views, we can clearly identify the two clusters and also explore the
amount of variance within each cluster for different data variables.
5.4 Feedback from Domain Scientists
While we have yet to perform an extended analysis of the use of this
framework by domain scientists, we have collected some initial feed-
back from our collaborators based on our current implementation. Two
high-level points of feedback are: first, there is widespread agreement
that new analysis strategies are needed for working with these data,
and second, the framework presented here is a drastic departure from
current practice in fields such as evolutionary biology and orthope-
dics. A key point of departure is the notion that it may be possible
to look at all of the data from an experiment at once via the overview
visualization methods. During a feedback session with our collabora-
tors, this point sparked considerable discussion, including discussion
of the use of tracer lines within the small multiples views and the po-
tential to extend this concept to more sophisticated “tracers” that also
encode velocity, rotation angle, or other variables through color cod-
ing or other visual means. This feedback reinforces the importance of
exploring the design space of potential small multiples views that are
appropriate for motion visualization. During the same session, we also
confirmed several characteristic features of pig chewing motions and
investigated differences in the motion based upon the type of food (pig
chow vs. nuts) through interactive exploration using this framework.
6 DISCUSSION
In this section we discuss current limitations and future research direc-
tions suggested by this work.
6.1 Scalability of Small Multiples
One question raised by the current framework is, how will the tech-
niques scale to databases of various sizes? The initial overview visual-
ization, including the small multiples view, is perhaps the most inter-
esting aspect of the framework to discuss with scalability in mind. One
answer to the question is that the utility of the small multiples visual-
ization scales with the skill and creativity of the user in constructing
a useful small multiples display. The display in Figure 2 is useful
for discerning some trends across 108 related motion sequences. With
fewer motion sequences, alternative views, including those that feature
the bones prominently may be useful. With more motion sequences,
this layout and others may still be useful, but certainly at some point,
the utility of a small multiples display crafted from snapshots of 3D
renderings will reach a limit.
A complementary technique to address the scalability of this small
multiples motion overview may be the use of filtering within the small
multiples view or within new instances of it in separate windows.
Currently this display functions as a complete overview of the entire
database, however, such an overview may also be appropriate for a
subset of the original data. We have discussed this idea, but have not
yet developed an implementation of it. Several interesting user inter-
face issues remain in developing an interactive display of this form
that supports fluid, interactive exploration.
6.2 Scalability and Interactivity
Adding 3D renderings to a multi-window information visualization
system requires special design to maintain interactive framerates.
While the 2D graphics utilized in typical information visualization
Fig. 6. A sequence of side-by-side visualizations that demonstrate how the teeth slide against each other. The 3D view has been rotated so that
we are looking up at the top rows of teeth, and the mandible has been hidden from view. A color map has been texture mapped onto the forms of
the teeth to encode the vertical distance (defined by the principle axes of the skull) separating the teeth. The chewing sequence advances in time
across the views from left to right. A 3D instantaneous helical axis describing the motion of the mandible relative to the skull is also displayed.
techniques are relatively fast to render, 3D scientific visualizations of-
ten utilize the full extent of the rendering power provided by current
graphics hardware, just to render a single view of the data.
Working with the data set described here, our current implementa-
tion maintains interactive framerates, depending on the view options
set, while rendering on the order of five instances the 3D scene in the
filtered and comparison views. This seems to be a minimum level of
performance for reasonable analysis using the framework. To extend
the framework to applications that involve more intensive 3D render-
ing, new strategies for addressing multi-view 3D rendering will be
required. One potential direction for this research is to use a prior-
itized rendering scheme, directing more rendering resources to the
views that are actively being manipulated. Since the viewer’s atten-
tion is divided between several views in multi-view systems, artifacts
in some views may be almost unnoticeable from a perceptual stand-
point. An example would be the use of image warping [18] to support
linked camera manipulation in several 3D windows. The view in the
window that the user is actually manipulating might be rendered as a
true 3D scene, while other (lower priority) views might update in an
approximate fashion using a faster rendering technique.
6.3 Alternative Visual Representations for Motion
Previously demonstrated 3D animated small multiples displays have
supported rendering just a handful of multiples [2], which give them a
very different visual character than the display in Figure 2. With addi-
tional technical work to address rendering speed, it should be possible
to develop animated 3D small multiples displays of tens to hundreds
of animated 3D scenes. This raises the question of whether such a
display would be useful in analysis of 3D motions. Our current work
was motivated by the finding that static views may outperform ani-
mation in analysis of trends [16]. Based on this notion, adding even
more animation seems to have more potential to distract than to clar-
ify. Nevertheless, it would be interesting to investigate whether certain
classes of 3D motion trends may be discernible through visualization
in large-scale animated small multiples displays.
Currently, the most useful static small multiple representations for
motion that we have discovered are of the form seen in Figure 2,
simple geometric representations that describe motion from multiple
frames of data in a single image. In addition to tracers, other visuals
commonly found in 3D motion visualization applications may also be
useful as small multiple images. Examples beyond tracer particles that
fit this description include the average axis of rotation or the ruled sur-
face swept out by an instantaneous axis of rotation over a sequence of
frames of motion.
6.4 New Data Sources
In applying this framework to other data sets, one of the important
next issues to address is handling biomechanical systems containing
more than two bones, such as the spine or the wrist. The skull and jaw
system is a special, rather complicated, case for a two-bone system, in
that the jaw has multiple attachment points to the skull (the TMJ on
both sides), and the two bones also interact as the teeth come together.
Thus, many of the strategies employed here (e.g. interacting with 3D
views to establish spatial points of interest, using multiple windows to
focus on multiple points of interest) are likely to be relevant to analysis
in complex systems with more than two rigid bodies in motion.
7 CONCLUSION
As new high-speed, high-resolution imaging capabilities see increased
use in fields such as orthopedics, physical therapy, and evolutionary
biology, scientists will face considerable challenges in analyzing the
wealth of complex, 3D, time-varying data that result from these sys-
tems. The framework presented here is specifically geared toward ad-
dressing many of the new challenges posed by these data. Compara-
tive analysis across large sets of experimentally collected data is facil-
itated by integrating 2D and 3D interactive visualization tools to sup-
port an overview first, zoom and filter, then details-on-demand style
of analysis. A new interactive approach to constructing small mul-
tiples overview visualizations is demonstrated using a collection of
more than one hundred repeated cyclic motions. Specific interactive
links that may be made between 2D and 3D visualizations to facili-
tate zooming, filtering, and exploring motion data are also presented.
These links include the use of data generated “on the fly” during anal-
ysis, as seen in Figure 4, where the path of a 3D tracer curve gen-
erated by the user acts as a filtering variable within coordinated 2D
views. Two methods (overlays and side-by-sides) are presented for
Fig. 7. Clusters of motion cycles are identified using a combination of
the 2D xy-plot and the parallel coordinates view.
detailed motion analysis using coordinated multi-view visualization.
Each utilizes sophisticated 3D views that incorporate features, such as
visualization of surface-to-surface distances via texture-mapped color
coding, along with interactive 2D views, such as parallel coordinates
plots that are non-traditional in this domain.
Many challenges remain in this line of research, including im-
proving scalability, refining visual representations, and extending this
framework to new data sources. Our initial feedback from domain
scientists confirms both the need for new analysis strategies, and the
novelty of this framework compared to current practice in their fields.
In particular, our collaborators expressed considerable interest in the
overview visualization component of the framework and in future
work designed to extend the small multiples tracer views to depict
additional data. These findings contribute to a growing body of knowl-
edge of the topic of coordinated, multi-view visualization systems that
reinterpret and recombine techniques from scientific and information
visualization to address driving scientific analysis challenges.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to graciously acknowledge their collaborators
in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and the
XROMM [1] group at Brown University. In particular, thanks to Eliz-
abeth Brainerd, Stephen Gatesy, and David Baier for providing the ex-
perimental data visualized here and for insightful discussions that both
inspired this work and provided initial feedback. Also, special thanks
to David Laidlaw at Brown University for growing the initial inter-
disciplinary collaborations that made this research possible. Finally,
thanks to David Nuckley at the University of Minnesota for discus-
sions about current trends in motion data analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] BrownUniversity. X-ray reconstruction of moving morphology (xromm).
http://xromm.org, 2009.
[2] J. Chen, A. S. Forsberg, S. M. Swartz, and D. H. Laidlaw. Interactive
multiple scale small multiples. IEEE Visualization 2007 Poster Com-
pendium, 2007.
[3] G. Convertino, J. Chen, B. Yost, Y.-S. Ryu, and C. North. Exploring
context switching and cognition in dual-view coordinated visualizations.
In CMV ’03: Proceedings of the conference on Coordinated and Multi-
ple Views In Exploratory Visualization, page 55, Washington, DC, USA,
2003. IEEE Computer Society.
[4] J. J. Crisco, J. C. Coburn, D. C. Moore, E. Akelman, A.-P. C. Weiss,
and S. W. Wolfe. In vivo radiocarpal kinematics and the dart thrower’s
motion. The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 87:2729–2740, 2005.
[5] M. Ericson. Infovis keynote address: Visualizing data for the masses:
Information graphics at the new york times. ieee transactions on visual-
ization and computer graphics, 13, 2007.
[6] L. M. Gallo, G. B. Airoldi, R. L. Airoldi, and S. Palla. Description of
mandibular finite helical axis pathways in asymptomatic subjects. Jour-
nal of Dental Research, 72(2):704–713, 1997.
[7] H. Hauser, D. Weiskopf, K.-L. Ma, J. J. van Wijk, and R. Kosara. Scivis,
infovis bridging the community divide?! In IEEE Visualization (Panel
Proceedings), pages 52–55. IEEE CS Press, 2006.
[8] D. F. Keefe, T. M. O’Brien, D. B. Baier, S. M. Gatesy, E. L. Brainerd,
and D. H. Laidlaw. Exploratory visualization of animal kinematics using
instantaneous helical axes. Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis Special
Issue), 27(3):863–870, 2008.
[9] H. Lam. A framework of interaction costs in information visualiza-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
14(6):1149–1156, 2008.
[10] G. Marai, D. Laidlaw, C. Demiralp, S. Andrews, C. Grimm, and J. Crisco.
Estimating joint contact areas and ligament lengths from bone kinematics
and surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 51:790–
799, May 2003.
[11] C. North and B. Shneiderman. Snap-together visualization: can users
construct and operate coordinated visualizations? International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 53:715–739, 2000.
[12] S. Oeltze, H. Doleisch, H. Hauser, P. Muigg, and B. Preim. Interactive
visual analysis of perfusion data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 13(6):1392–1399, 2007.
[13] H. Piringer, R. Kosara, and H. Hauser. Interactive focus+context visu-
alization with linked 2d/3d scatterplots. In CMV ’04: Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization, pages 49–60, Washington, DC, USA, 2004.
IEEE Computer Society.
[14] T.-M. Rhyne, M. Tory, T. Munzner, M. Ward, C. Johnson, and D. H.
Laidlaw. Information and scientific visualization: Separate but equal or
happy together at last? In IEEE Visualization (Panel Proceedings), pages
611–614. IEEE CS Press, 2003.
[15] J. C. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views in ex-
ploratory visualization. In CMV ’07: Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Vi-
sualization, pages 61–71, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer
Society.
[16] G. Robertson, R. Fernandez, D. Fisher, B. Lee, and J. Stasko. Effective-
ness of animation in trend visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1325–1332, 2008.
[17] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for in-
formation visualizations. In VL ’96: Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Sym-
posium on Visual Languages, page 336, Washington, DC, USA, 1996.
IEEE Computer Society.
[18] F. Smit, R. van Liere, S. Beck, and B. Froehlich. An image warping
architecture for vr: Low latency versus image quality. In Proceedings of
IEEE Virtual Reality 2009, pages 27–34, 2009.
[19] M. Tory, S. Potts, and T. Mo¨ller. A parallel coordinates style interface for
exploratory volume visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 11(1):71–80, 2005.
[20] E. R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[21] S. L. Van Sint Jan, G. J. Clapworthy, and M. Rooze. Visualization of
combined motions in human joints. IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli-
cations, 18(6):10–14, 1998.
[22] B. You, P. Siy, W. Anderst, and S. Tashman. In vivo measurement of 3-D
skeletal kinematics from sequences of biplane radiographs: Application
to knee kinematics. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 20(6):514–
525, 2001.

