TenniVis: Visualization for Tennis Match Analysis
Tom Polk, Member, IEEE, Jing Yang, Yueqi Hu, and Ye Zhao
Fig. 1. A college men’s singles tennis match in TenniVis. (a) Match scores and filters. (b) Pie Meter view. Each Pie Meter represents
a game. Balls above/below it represent points gained by player one/two. Solid/hollow balls represent good (ace, winner, forced error)
/bad (double-fault, unforced error) points. The darker the green/red colors in the pie, the better the chance player one/two had to win
the game. Needle color shows who won the game (green for player one, red for player two). Needle angle indicates the final score
(the closer to East, the closer the score was). Red and green boxes identify service breaks. (1) A game won easily by player one. (2)
A game won with difficulty by player two. (c) Bar charts of point outcome statistics in multiple filter configurations. (d) Video viewer
playing a video clip of a point.
Abstract—Existing research efforts into tennis visualization have primarily focused on using ball and player tracking data to enhance
professional tennis broadcasts and to aid coaches in helping their students. Gathering and analyzing this data typically requires
the use of an array of synchronized cameras, which are expensive for non-professional tennis matches. In this paper, we propose
TenniVis, a novel tennis match visualization system that relies entirely on data that can be easily collected, such as score, point
outcomes, point lengths, service information, and match videos that can be captured by one consumer-level camera. It provides
two new visualizations to allow tennis coaches and players to quickly gain insights into match performance. It also provides rich
interactions to support ad hoc hypothesis development and testing. We first demonstrate the usefulness of the system by analyzing
the 2007 Australian Open men’s singles final. We then validate its usability by two pilot user studies where two college tennis coaches
analyzed the matches of their own players. The results indicate that useful insights can quickly be discovered and ad hoc hypotheses
based on these insights can conveniently be tested through linked match videos.
Index Terms—Visual knowledge discovery, sports analytics, tennis visualization
1 INTRODUCTION
Visualization has been an important means of match analysis in a va-
riety of sports [11, 12, 14, 18, 19]. For example, Perin et al. demon-
strated the usefulness of visualizations in helping tactics analysts find
insights into soccer games they would not have otherwise been able to
• Tom Polk, Jing Yang, and Yueqi Hu are with the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte. E-mail: tepolk, jyang13, yhu12@uncc.edu.
• Ye Zhao is with Kent State University. E-mail: zhao@cs.kent.edu.
Manuscript received 31 March 2014.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.
find [18]. For tennis, much of the existing work utilizes ball and player
tracking information to provide virtual replays of tennis matches [20].
This tracking information is also used to provide summary level in-
formation about player strategies such as player movement [21, 28].
A major challenge facing these approaches is that collecting the data
typically requires an array of cameras and a system capable of han-
dling the large amounts of video input in real time. While this might
be reasonable for major, professional tennis tournaments, such a sys-
tem is prohibitively expensive and impractical for the large body of
non-professional tennis players at the college, high-school, and club
levels.
Meanwhile, comparatively little work has been done on visualiza-
tion of non-spatial data of tennis matches, such as score, point out-
comes, point lengths and service information. Such data is easy to
Fig. 2. Fish Grid views of the Federer-Gonzalez match (won by Federer 7-6, 6-4, 6-4). (a)-(c) are captured from a zoomed-in view and (d) is a
zoomed out view. Each Fish Grid is a score matrix rotated 45 degrees with point outcomes mapped on it as balls (green/red: point gained by
Federer/Gonzalez; solid/hollow: good/bad shot). The horizontal order of the balls indicates the temporal order of the points. The vertical position
of a ball indicate who was in lead before the point (above the horizontal, Federer is in the lead; below the horizontal, Gonzalez is in the lead). (a) A
game won easily by Federer. (b) The longest game in the match (won by Gonzalez). (c) A game with a “choke” point for Gonzalez, identified using
filters. (d) Fish Grids for the entire match. Although shown small here, they still convey trend information for each game. (e) Sample Point Outcome
Glyphs (balls) at different zoom levels. At the maximum zoom level, tick marks represent point length in seconds and triangles represent service
side (left/right) and first vs. second serve (solid/hollow).
collect by non-professional players and carries both high level sum-
maries and low level details about a match. Unfortunately, this data
is usually analyzed in aggregated statistics and thus valuable insights
about local details and trends are often missing.
The above observation inspired us to build a tennis visualization
system for non-professional players based on non-spatial data. We
thus develop a new system with the following goals:
• To be economically and technologically feasible for non-
professional tennis players. In other words, no expensive ball
and player tracking equipment and analysis software will be re-
quired.
• To provide easy to learn visualizations and easy to use interac-
tions. Therefore, tennis coaches and players will be able to use
the system without the accompaniment of visualization experts.
• To support users quickly discovering patterns about players and
matches; to facilitate them in ad hoc hypothesis generation and
evaluation.
• To allow coaches and players to easily share insights gained from
the visualizations.
Our new system, named TenniVis, provides the following features
to meet the above goals:
• Easy-to-collect data input: TenniVis merely requires the follow-
ing information as its inputs: (1) the match video captured by
a single consumer-level video camera and (2) non-spatial data
that can be easily collected by someone spectating a match (i.e.,
parent, coach, or teammate) in real time. It includes timestamps
marking the start and end of each point, indication of second
serve, and point outcome (i.e., ace, double-fault, winner, forced
error, or unforced error). Other information, including score in-
formation, who is serving, service side (ad or deuce court), game
length (i.e., number of points), point length, and service breaks,
can be derived from the data and the inherent structure of a tennis
match.
• Easily learnable visualizations: TenniVis provides two novel
views that can be quickly learned and understood by novice
users: the Pie Meter view and the Fish Grid view. The Pie Meter
view (see Figure 1 (b)) provides a high-level overview of an en-
tire match. It reveals who won a game and the degree to which
the score in the game fluctuated in favor of one player. The Fish
Grid view (see Figure 2) provides more details at the game level
by displaying each point outcome as the game score progresses.
The game length, trend, and critical points can be easily observed
from this view.
• Ad hoc hypothesis generation and evaluation: A variety of
player, set, game, and point level filters are provided, allowing
users to generate hypotheses about point outcomes. Users can
evaluate these hypotheses using the outcome bar chart snapshots
(see Figure 1 (c)) as well as by reviewing the video associated
with specific points.
• Result sharing: Users can annotate individual points with their
observations from the associated video clips (see Figure 1 (d)).
These points are highlighted in the visualizations for easy review.
The annotated video clips are automatically assembled into an
HTML report that can easily be shared with players or coaches.
Non-professional tennis players and coaches have participated and
provided important input to the development of TenniVis. First, the
first author, who is also the developer of the system, has over 35 years
of tennis playing experience. Second, a set of face-to-face meetings,
phone interviews, and user studies have been conducted with non-
professional tennis coaches. The coaches confirmed the feasibility of
data collection for TenniVis. They also confirmed the usefulness of
TenniVis in two pilot user studies where matches of their own players
were analyzed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 pro-
vides background knowledge on tennis and discusses challenges fac-
ing non-professional players when analyzing tennis matches. Section
3 presents related work. Section 4 presents TenniVis and illustrates its
features using the case of a professional tennis match between Roger
Federer and Fernando Gonzalez from the 2007 Australian Open Fi-
nals, won by Federer in three sets (7-6, 6-4, 6-4). Section 5 presents
two pilot user studies of college tennis matches, where the analysis was
performed by the coaches themselves. Section 6 presents our conclu-
sions and future work.
2 BACKGROUND AND REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS
In this section, we introduce background knowledge of tennis, point
out match information that is important for match analysis, and high-
light the requirements it brings to tennis visualization systems in bold
fonts. The important information and requirements were identified ac-
cording to the first author’s own experience and intensive phone and
face-to-face discussions with four club and college coaches.
Tennis lends itself to analysis due to its structured, hierarchical na-
ture. A typical non-professional tennis match consists of the best two
out of three sets, where each set is awarded to the player who gets six
games first (with at least a two game margin). Each game is awarded
to the player who gets four points first (with at least a two point mar-
gin). One player serves all the points in a game. Players alternate
serving each game. They also change sides of the court after the first
game and then after every two games. Serving is considered an advan-
tage in tennis, so it is important to highlight games where the serving
player loses the game. This is called a service break. Who is serving
and service breaks should be immediately noticeable to users. If
the game score within a set reaches six-six, a 12-point tiebreaker is
played. In this tiebreaker one player serves one point and then each
player takes turns serving two points. The player to get to seven points
first with a margin of at least two points wins the tiebreaker and is
awarded the set. If players get to six-six in the tiebreaker, they con-
tinue playing until one player gets a two point lead.
The scoring progression in a game is as follows: 0 (or love), 15,
30, 40, game. If, in a game, both players each get three points (called
deuce), then play continues until one of the players gets a two point
lead over the other player, thus winning the game. After a deuce point
has been reached, when a player gets a point we say that player has the
advantage. The score is usually reported from the server’s viewpoint.
In terms of risk, not all points within a game are equal. For example,
a player serving at 40-0 in a game needs only to win one of the next
three points to win the game. From the server’s perspective, this is a far
more comfortable position to be in relative to a score of 0-40 (known
as a break point). Visually encoding the risks associated with the
points will help users understand the pressure on the players at
each point.
As with many sports, there is a psychological component to tennis
that affects players differently. Some players ease off in their intensity
after getting a lead just to see their lead slipping away (known as chok-
ing). Other players are able to step up and recover after being down
in a match (known as rallying back). Choking and rallying back
should be easy to spot in visualizations because they may identify
player patterns that need to be modified.
A tennis point begins with a serve by one of the players. The start-
ing location of the serve is behind the baseline on either the right half
of the court (called the deuce side) or the left half (called the ad side).
See [2] for an explanation of the various parts of a tennis court. If the
server misses the first serve (i.e., it does not land in the correct service
box), this is called a fault and the player gets to try again. If the player
misses the second serve, this is called a double-fault and the point is
awarded to the receiving player.
When analyzing a tennis match, information about whether a point
started off on a first versus a second serve is very important because
a player’s second serve is usually not as powerful or effective as their
first serve (thereby giving the receiving player an easier opportunity to
return the serve). If the server hits the ball in the opponent’s service
box and the opponent does not touch the ball, this is called an ace and
the point is awarded to the serving player.
Tennis points can end one of three additional ways besides by
double-fault or ace: winner, forced error, or unforced error. A win-
ner is when a player hits a legal shot (other than a serve) to his or her
opponent and the opponent does not touch the ball. A forced error is
similar to a winner except that the opponent is able to touch the ball.
Both winners and forced errors (as well as aces) are “good” shots at-
tributed to the “good” shot made by a player. An unforced error is
when a player, despite having enough time to get to the ball and exe-
cute a good shot, ends up instead hitting the ball out of bounds or into
the net. An unforced error, like a double-fault, is considered a “bad”
shot attributed to the player that made the error because it gives a point
to the opponent.
In analyzing tennis matches, understanding how points end is vi-
tally important to understanding why a player is winning or losing
his or her matches. The coaches that we talked to during our pilot
user studies indicated that unforced errors help them identify poten-
tial shots a player needs to work on. They also indicated that winners
made by an opposing player are often the result of poor shot selection
on previous shots by a player. Thus, examining winners helps identify
areas where strategies may need to be improved. Visually presenting
point information, such as service information, good or bad shots,
and point outcome types, can provide useful insights to coaches
and players.
In addition to having information about the outcome of a point (ace,
winner, unforced error etc.) and the service information (first versus
second serve), the score of a game at which a specific outcome occurs
is also important. For example, some players may have a tendency to
start off games slowly and get behind. Seeing this in the visualization,
coaches can work with a player to change their tactics or teach them
how to be more mentally prepared at the start of a game. Therefore, it
is very useful for visualization systems to visually present the point
outcomes within the context of the score where they occur.
While video analysis is fairly common in many sports, such as
American football, this is not as common in tennis matches, due pri-
marily to the expense of analyzing this data. Unlike team sports where
there is one match in which all members of the team participate, team
tennis matches involve multiple, separate matches being played simul-
taneously. In NCAA [6] tennis matches, teams play three doubles
matches followed by six singles matches. A typical singles match may
last two or more hours, leading to 12 hours of video (for just singles)
to be analyzed per team match. Many teams play 2 or 3 matches per
week, resulting in 36 hours of video per week. It is time consuming
for the coaches to analyze such a large volume of video. Meanwhile, it
is important for coaches and players to watch the video of interesting
points. Thus there is a dire need for visualization systems that can
help coaches (or the players themselves) quickly identify points in
a match that may lead to insights and watch the video clips associ-
ated with them, without having to sift through all of the raw video
data.
3 RELATED WORK
Many tennis visualization systems have been developed for enhancing
commercial broadcasts of professional tennis matches at major tourna-
ments or improving player performance. Most of them require ball and
player tracking information. Jin and Banks [13] visualize tennis shots
as two-dimensional ball traces and use a magic-lens to allow users
to filter interesting points and to step through all points in a match
through a time-varying display. However, they relied on a synthesized
data set rather than on any actual ball trajectories. Systems such as
HawkEye [17], LucentVision [22] and Tennissense [9, 10] require
the use of an array of synchronized cameras to collect ball and player
tracking information. HawkEye [17] and LucentVision [22] provide
player movement data and ball landing positions for serves and shots
during each point. This enables insights such as patterns, strengths,
and weakness of players to be gained from the tracking data. These
insights are provided to professional tennis analysts to enhance live
broadcasts and are also used for novel visualizations for tennis fans,
including the capability for fans to experience serves from the player’s
perspective. Tennissense [9, 10] automatically extracts key events
such as games, change of ends, and serves from match videos. It
presents a coaching interface where users can quickly jump to any
event in a match to examine it from the perspective of any of the
nine arrayed camera angles. The drawback of the above approaches
is that they are prohibitively expensive and impractical for most non-
professional tennis players. In addition, they can only be used for
Fig. 3. Pie Meter view of the Federer-Gonzalez match. (a) Before filtering. All games are displayed. (b) After filtering. Only games won easily by
either player are displayed. (c) The Game Outcome Filter used for the filtering.
matches played at the courts where the equipment is installed.
To avoid using the expensive equipment, several commercial prod-
ucts rely on human beings to collect the track information. They fall
into two basic categories: motion analysis software (e.g., Dartfish [1],
MotionView [3]) and tennis match point tracking (e.g., ProTracker
[4]). The motion analysis software is not designed for analyzing en-
tire matches, but rather is used for reviewing swing and service tech-
niques. Players can capture tennis swings on high-speed cameras and
then review it in slow-motion. They can also select objects in sub-
sequent frames to show a swing path and they can add voiceovers to
capture their observations. ProTracker [4] requires a third party (i.e.,
coach or parent of a player) to manually enter shot position informa-
tion for serves, returns, and key shots. It then generates a report with
match summary statistics, scatter diagrams for serves, returns, and key
shots, and a momentum chart that identifies potential turning points in
a match. These approaches require tedious human efforts to optionally
enter location information manually for a small subset of the overall
points (i.e., just serves and key shots).
Statistics have been widely used in analysis of tennis and other
sports. Websites such as IBM’s SlamTracker [5] present basic statis-
tics from professional tennis matches, including the number of aces,
double faults, winners, and unforced errors. They also present statis-
tics such as the first and second serve win percentages and the percent
of times a player wins when he or she approaches the net. TenniVis
greatly leverages the power of statistics by interactive visualization: it
allows users to flexibly select points of interest and generate bar charts
to examine their aggregated statistics. Meanwhile, the users can im-
mediately review the video of any points in the selection. In this way,
they can immediately test any hypotheses inspired by the statistics.
Several visualizations and interactions in TenniVis, such as Point
Outcome Glyphs, semantic zooming, and filtering, are inspired by
previous work. Glyphs [8, 25, 26], a traditional multidimensional vi-
sualization technique, have been used in sport visualization systems.
For example, MatchPad [14] uses glyphs to encode event records in
rugby. Semantic zooming, an interaction technique that couples zoom-
ing with changes in levels-of-detail, have been used in tree visualiza-
tion [23], software visualization [16] and many other visualizations.
Our pie-shaped filter is inspired by dynamic queries [7, 27].
4 TENNIVIS
4.1 System Overview
In order to address the information needs discussed in Section 2, Ten-
niVis employs visualizations that mimic real-life metaphors, such as
dial meters, to make it easy for coaches and players to learn and inter-
pret the visualizations. Consistent visual encoding schemes are used
across the visualizations to facilitate learning and allow for easy tran-
sition between visualizations.
Figure 1 shows the main screen of TenniVis. On the left are a set
of filters (top) and a video viewer (bottom). On the right are the main
visualization window (top) and an outcome bar chart panel (bottom).
Users can switch between the Pie Meter view and the Fish Grid view
in the main visualization window. The currently displayed visualiza-
tion can be zoomed in or out using the zoom slider located above it.
TenniVis provides a multi-resolution approach to allow users to exam-
ine a match at multiple levels of detail. In particular, the Pie Meter
view (see Figure 1 (b)) provides a match level overview where users
can quickly examine the outcome of all sets and games, see how in-
tensive each game is, and effectively compare the performance of the
two players.
The Fish Grid view (see Figure 2) allows users to examine the
match in a finer level of detail. Users can quickly see the progression
of points within a game, each point outcome (ace, winner, unforced er-
ror, etc.) against a backdrop of the current game score. They can also
instantly distinguish between very short games where one player wins
easily and very long games where the players battle back and forth.
The finest level of detail TenniVis provides is the playback of match
video of a user-selected point. When a point is selected, the video
clip for that point immediately begins playing in the video viewer (see
Figure 1 (d)). The user can also open up a larger, secondary win-
dow to view a full screen version of the video (particularly useful in a
multiple-monitor environment).
A rich set of interactions are provided in TenniVis using a spectrum
of filters (see Figure 1 (a)) that, in combination, allow users to select
semantically meaningful sets of points. This allows them to exam-
ine the percent distribution, point length, and first serve percentage of
point outcomes (ace, winners, unforced errors, etc.) in bar charts. In
this way, users can create ad hoc hypotheses on why specific games or
points were won or lost. Since users can easily drill-down to any point
to watch the corresponding video clip, these hypotheses can be conve-
niently tested. To share the insights captured in the visual exploration,
users are able to make notes on their insights and to generate reports
that consist of written text and video clips that can be shared with the
player or coaches.
In the following sections, we introduce the data collection, visual-
izations and interactions of TenniVis in full detail. The match between
Roger Federer and Fernando Gonzalez in the 2007 Australian Open
Men’s Singles Final (won by Federer 7-6, 6-4, 6-4) is used as an ex-
ample dataset since many readers are familiar with these players.
4.2 Data Collection
Match videos are desired in tennis analysis since all insights ultimately
need to be evaluated through them. As one of the tennis coaches
in our pilot studies commented, “they (the players) need to see it”.
TenniVis allows users to rapidly identify points of interest and conve-
niently watch their video clips. Since ball and player tracking data is
not used in TenniVis, only one consumer-level video camera is needed
for video capturing and no tedious manual tracking data collection is
required.
The non-spatial data is manually collected on-the-fly by a person
spectating a match. In order to support point-based selection of spe-
cific video clips, the start time and the end time of each point as well as
who won the point, the type of outcome (i.e., ace, double-fault, winner,
forced error, or unforced error), and service faults (i.e. missed serves)
are recorded. This approach, while requiring the attention of the data
collector throughout the match, can be easily collected using either a
smart phone or smart watch app. The spectator only needs to synchro-
nize the start time of the data collection app with the camera (before
or after the match) and click a few buttons when a point starts and
ends. There is ample time between points to perform this task. The
data collection app can keep track of score and who is serving based
on the rigid structure of a tennis match. Only one video per match is
required. The TenniVis system simply indexes into specific points in
the video based on the synchronized timestamps collected.
Data for historical matches can be collected in a similar way, with
the only difference being that the spectator watches the match videos
rather than the live matches. We asked several coaches about the fea-
sibility of the players themselves collecting this data during a match
(using a smart watch app) and they indicated this is not realistic. They
noted, however, that they often have players who are not playing in
a particular match who would be able to collect this data. The rigid
structure of a tennis match allows a great deal of derived data to be
collected from the trivial data items collected manually, including in-
formation such as score, who is serving, service breaks, break point
opportunities, and point lengths (which is a surrogate measure for the
number of shots in a rally).
4.3 Pie Meter View
Figure 3 (a) displays the Pie Meter view of the match between Federer
and Gonzalez. It provides an overview of the match and also can be
animated to present the dynamic process of the match. The visualiza-
tion consists of multiple blocks. Each block visually presents a game.
It contains a needle gauge-like glyph called a Pie Meter and rows of
balls representing points called Point Outcome Glyphs (see Section
4.4). Games of the same set are placed in the same row, sorted from
left to right by play order. The sets are ordered from top to bottom
by play order. The score panels on the left of each Pie Meter show
the game score within the set just prior to that game. A black ball
shown at the top left of the Pie Meter indicates player one is serving,
while a black ball on the bottom left indicates player two is serving.
To highlight service breaks, games with a service break are surrounded
by a red box (player two broke the serve of player one) or a green box
(player one broke player two’s serve).
Please note that in TenniVis, information about player 1 is always
positioned in the top half of the visualization graphics and informa-
tion about player 2 is always positioned in the bottom half of the vi-
sualization graphics, as exemplified by positioning of the black ball
indicating who is serving. Similarly, green is always used to represent
something good for player one and red is used to represent something
good for player two. The highlight of service breaks is an example of
this scheme. These encoding themes will be seen again and again in
the rest of the paper. They are used in TenniVis since (1) A versus B
is the most important information in tennis, an A versus B style sport;
(2) According to Mackinlay [15], position and color hue are the most
relevant encodings for perceptual tasks with nominal data. Thus they
should be used for the most important information; and (3) Consistent
visual encoding facilitates learning.
The needle gauge metaphor is employed in the Pie Meter since the
rotation of a needle on a gauge is a familiar and natural way to reveal
how a game progresses in favor of player one or player two. In our
initial design, a full gauge covering 180 degrees is displayed and a
needle dynamically traverses within the gauge as the game progresses.
The position and the background color of the needle indicate whether
the game is currently at a score in favor of player one or player two.
After the initial prototype was implemented, we soon realized that the
area traversed by the needle in a game reveals interesting information
such as whether a game was dominated by one player or swung back
and forth. Therefore, we revised the design and removed the part of a
Fig. 4. Succession of points from left to right and their corresponding
needle angle changes in the Pie Meter for a game. Needle color shows
that player 2 won. The green gradient colors indicate advantage for
player 1 and the red gradient colors indicate advantage for player 2.
gauge not traversed by the needle in the game (so it looks like a pie).
The details of the Pie Meter visual encoding is introduced below.
Following the color scheme, needle color shows who won the game
(green for player one, red for player two). The gauge background
(the pie) is divided into many sectors. Each of them is mapped to
a range of conditional probabilities of player one winning the game
(probabilities in short). The probabilities are encoded by colors of the
sectors. Here again, green means player one has a better chance to win
and red means player two has a better chance to win. The darker the
color is, the higher the chance. The gauge is positioned vertically, with
green sectors on the top half and red sectors on the bottom half.
All possible game scores are assigned a probability using a coin-
flip simulation, assuming that players are equally skilled. When a
game progresses, the needle is placed in the gauge according to the
probability of the current score. When the game score is equal, the
needle is placed at a white sector oriented to the East. When the score
is more favorable to player one/two, the needle moves to the green/red
sectors, indicating player one/two has a bigger chance to win. After
removing the sectors not traversed by the needle in a game, the dis-
play only consists of sectors covering all possibilities happening in the
game. Therefore, users can judge the intensity of a game by the color
and angles of its Pie Meter. As Figure 3 demonstrates, even when the
Pie Meters are relatively small, games where one player dominated are
easily distinguishable from close games that swung back and forth.
The above simplistic approach assumes that players are equally
skilled, which, of course, is often not the case. Better players are able
to come back and win a game, even when they are behind in the score.
However, this color coding scheme still makes it easy to distinguish
situations that are more favorable to a player winning a game (shades
of green) from those that are less favorable (shades of red).
The Pie Meter can be used in a static mode or an animation mode.
In the static mode, the needle angle indicates how close the final game
score was. There are eight possible final game scores: Game-40,
Game-30, Game-15, Game-0, 0-Game, 15-Game, 30-Game, and 40-
Game. These eight scores are mapped to needle angles ranging from
+90 to -90 degrees (assuming East is considered 0 degrees). Once
a game goes to deuce, the number of deuces is not considered: the
score is mapped as Game-40. A similar approach is used for tie-break
games.
A Pie Meter can be animated to step through the games (see Figure
4 for an example). When switching to the animation mode, all of
the needles reset to a neutral, horizontal position (indicating neither
player has an advantage). When player one wins a point, the needle
angle moves up in a counter-clockwise direction and when player two
wins a point, it moves down in a clockwise direction. Therefore, the
angle of the needle indicates the current advantage (i.e., conditional
probability of winning the game) one player has over the other and the
final needle angle indicates how close the game was. In Figure 4 we
can see that player one wins two points in a row, giving him a major
advantage. Player two then rallies back, winning four points in a row
to win the game.
Example 1 Figure 3 (a) reveals a few patterns about the match in
which Federer (player one) won in straight sets (7-6, 6-4, 6-4). First,
we see that Gonzalez (player two) broke Federer’s serve first (indicated
by the red box in the first set); but Federer broke right back. In sets two
and three, there were only two service breaks (both by Federer) which
gave him the match. The second pattern that emerges is that many of
the games in the first and third sets involved swings from one player
to another (indicated by Pie Meters with both red and green gradients
displayed), while all games in set two were won fairly easily by one
player or another.
4.4 Point Outcome Glyphs
According to the requirements analysis (see Section 2), the following
information about point outcomes are desired, sorted by importance:
(1) who won each point; (2) whether the outcome was due to a “good”
shot by the player winning the point or a “bad” shot by her/his op-
ponent; (3) the specific type of the point outcome; (4) at which score
the point outcome was generated; (5) details about the point, such as
how long the point was and service information. The Point Outcome
Glyphs (the green and red balls in the Pie Meter and Fish Grids) are
proposed to encode the above information for individual point out-
comes.
Since there are many point outcomes in a game, the glyph repre-
senting an individual point outcome can’t be too big. We select a ball-
shaped glyph design (see Figure 2 (e) for an example) since (1) it is
easy for users to associate a ball with a point outcome; (2) it provides
a maximum amount of interior space in which to write the outcome
letter (i.e., ‘a’ for ace, ‘w’ for winner, etc.); and (3) it allows us to
use the stopwatch metaphor to encode time as tick marks. To be con-
sistent with our color scheme, green balls indicate points awarded to
player one since they are good for player one. Red balls are for points
awarded to player two since they are in favor of player two. In ad-
dition, solid balls represent good shots (aces, winners, and forced er-
rors). Hollow balls represent bad shots (double faults and unforced
errors). Following our positioning scheme, points awarded to player
one were placed above the Pie Meters and points awarded to player
two were placed beneath the Pie Meters. In the Fish Grid View, the
balls are placed at the game score (e.g., 30-15) at which the point out-
come occurred.
To allow users to examine the point outcome information at multi-
ple levels of detail, the Point Outcome Glyphs have three visual states
based on the current zoom level. Additional semantic details are pro-
vided at greater zoom levels (see Figure 2 (e)). At the lowest seman-
tic zoom level, the Point Outcome Glyphs only reveal who won the
point and whether the point resulted from a good or a bad shot. At
the medium semantic zoom level, we add the detail about the spe-
cific type of outcome using a single lower-case letter: (a)ce, (w)inner,
(f)orced error, (u)nforced error, and (d)ouble fault. At the highest se-
mantic zoom level, we encode point length and sevice information.
Point length is encoded using white tick marks designed to look like
five-second intervals on a stopwatch. For service information, we use
a triangle to encode whether the point started on a first versus sec-
ond serve (solid black versus hollow white triangle) and service side
(deuce = right, ad = left).
Example 2 From Figure 3 (a), we can see a preponderance of bad
shots (unforced errors), indicated by hollow balls, in the first set versus
the second and third sets. In sets two and three there are more good
shots (winners and forced errors), which are indicated by solid balls.
4.5 Fish Grid View
The Fish Grid view (see Figure 2(a-d)) provides detailed information
about each point within the context of the whole match. A Fish Grid
is essentially a 4X4 matrix where the row indices represent points won
by player one and the column indices represent points won by player
two. To be consistent with our positioning scheme, this matrix is ro-
tated 45 degrees (resembling a fish) so that all the matrix cells located
above the horizontal represent scores where player one is in the lead,
cells below the horizontal represent a lead for player two, and cells on
the horizontal represent even scores. This maintains the same visual
metaphor established for the Pie Meters. Additional cells are added
for deuce and ad points, making up the tail of the fish.
If a game goes beyond a single deuce, the tail of the Fish Grid grows
to accommodate the extra points, thus making long games readily ap-
parent. For example, in Figure 2 (b), we can see the longest game
in the match (20 points). This occurred in the first set with Gonzalez
(player 2) serving at 5 games to 6.
Each cell location in a Fish Grid represents a specific game score
(e.g., 30-15). To help users navigate in a grid, a background color is
assigned to each cell to indicate whether the score is in favor of player
one or player two. In particular, a game win probability (from player
one’s perspective) for a given score is generated using the same coin-
flip simulation discussed in Section 4.3. The probabilities are mapped
to shades of green (win probabilities >50%), pure white (win proba-
bility = 50%), and shades of red (win probabilities<50%). Therefore,
green cells represent scores in favor of player one while red cells rep-
resent scores in favor of player two.
In order to emphasize the scores that actually occurred in the game,
only cells corresponding to those scores are colored. In this way, the
Fish Grids essentially become sparklines [24], showing the basic tem-
poral trend of each game, even when zoomed out. The vertical posi-
tion of a Point Outcome Glyph indicates who is currently ahead in the
game and its horizontal position encodes point sequence information.
For example, Figure 2(a) shows that the game was led by Gonzalez
at the very beginning as the result of a winning shot. But this was
followed by four good shots in a row by Federer (three winners and a
forced error), allowing him to win the game easily. We can also see
from the point lengths encoded on the glyphs that both the 0-15 and
40-15 points started with a first serve and were very short. This indi-
cates that Federer’s serves on these points was probably effective. We
verified this hypothesis by reviewing the video for these two points.
As with the Pie Meters, the current game score is shown to the left
of each Fish Grid and the black ball indicates who is serving. The
layout of the games is also the same as in the Pie Meter view.
Users can click on a Point Outcome Glyph in either a Fish Grid or
a Pie Meter to play its corresponding match video clip in the video
viewer (see Figure 1 (d)) or a standalone window. After watching a
video clip, users can manually record their insights associated with the
point through the text entry above the video viewer. Points with user
observations are highlighted in yellow in both the Pie Meter and Fish
Grid views (not shown in the figures). When a user hovers the mouse
pointer over a highlighted point, their observations will be presented
as a tooltip. When the users reload the video of a point by clicking
on its Point Outcome Glyph, the observation will also be displayed in
the text entry field above the video viewer so that the user can edit the
observation.
Fig. 5. Fish Grids for games 3, 5, and 7 in the second set showing
Gonzalez holding serve easily in games 3 and 5 but then getting broken
easily by Federer in game 7.
Example 3 In examining the second set, shown in Figure 2 (d),
we see that in almost all the games, the serving player won easily. The
glaring exception is the one and only service break where Federer won
four of the five points on Gonzalez’ serve. Using the zoom control, we
take a closer look at games 3, 5, and 7 in the second set (shown in
Figure 5). These show two service games won easily by Gonzalez
followed by a service game in which Federer won by a large margin.
To understand more closely why Gonzalez was able to win his two
service games prior to the service break so easily and then lose the
service break game so easily, we click on individual Point Outcome
Glyphs in the Fish Grid (one at a time) to load them into the video
viewer. In examining the videos of the 13 points for these three games,
we saw that seven out of the nine points won by Gonzalez started with
a serve to Federer’s backhand and that all four points won by Federer
started with a serve to his forehand.
4.6 Filters and Bar Charts
Fig. 6. Bar charts comparing all points in the first set (left) to all points
in sets two and three (right). The first set contains a lot of unforced
errors and fewer winners and forced errors. Sets two and three have far
fewer unforced errors and more winners and forced errors, particularly
by Federer (the solid green bars).
The filters (see Figure 1 (a)) allow users to interactively select sets,
games and points for further analysis. They can also select an individ-
ual player to examine just their shots. When the filters are activated,
the unselected games and points in both the Pie Meter and Fish Grid
views fade out so that users can focus on the selected ones. Sets are
selected by their set numbers. Games can be selected in terms of who
is serving and/or who won the game.
A novel game filter called the Game Outcome Filter (see Figure
3 (c)) allows users to distinguish easily won games from close games.
Users simply click on one or more pie sectors and only those games
whose needle ended within the selected sectors are displayed. Individ-
ual points can be selected in terms of who won the point and whether or
not the point started from a first or a second serve. There is also a novel
pie-shaped filter called the Game Win Probability Filter (shown in
Figure 1 (a)) that allows the user to only display points that occurred
at specific needle angles (which represent conditional probabilities of
winning a game for any given score).
Filters can be turned on and off individually to provide basic in-
sights or used in combination to support various investigative lines
of inference. For example, coaches may want to look at all of their
player’s first serves. To focus on just these points, the coach would se-
lect the Serving game filter and the First Serve point filter. To facilitate
efficient game analysis (particularly for novice users), a predefined set
of common filter configurations is provided in the Filter Configura-
tions Drop-Down (see Figure 1 (a)). The set of predefined filters was
added based on feedback from the coaches in our pilot studies. More
advanced users can also create, name, and save their own filter config-
urations.
TenniVis provides a bar chart panel from which users can visually
examine the aggregated statistics of outcomes of all points they se-
lected using the filters. In the bar charts (see Figure 6 for examples),
the relative percentage of each outcome type (aces, winners, unforced
errors, etc.) is displayed. The same visual scheme used to encode in-
formation into the Point Outcome Glyphs is used in the design of the
bars. Green bars are for points won by player one and red bars for
points won by player two. Solid bars refer to good shots and hollow
bars refer to bad shots. Users can see the actual number of each type of
outcome by hovering the mouse pointer over a bar. A user-selectable
secondary Y-axis can also be displayed on the bar charts. Users can
choose to view average point lengths or first serve percentages. They
can also toggle off this secondary axis completely.
The bar chart panel keeps one or more bar charts side-by-side (see
Figure 1 (c)). The leftmost bar chart shows the statistics of the current
selection and automatically updates whenever the filters are changed.
The other bar charts are snapshots of previous filter configurations.
To save a snapshot, users click a button to capture the snapshot for
the current filter configuration before they modify the filters to a new
configuration. They assign a name to it, which helps when recalling
the meaning of the filter configuration. The snapshots enable users to
compare a set of point outcomes for one filter configuration with those
resulting from different filter configurations. When a new snapshot is
created, the vertical scales of all existing bar charts are automatically
adjusted to the same to enable comparison. Moreover, users can toggle
on a horizontal ruler that spans across all snapshots to compare the bar
charts more accurately.
Snapshots also serve for the purpose of insight management. First,
clicking on the name of a snapshot brings the filters (and hence the
Pie Meter and Fish Grid views) back to the status when the snapshot
was captured. Second, observations related to a snapshot can be en-
tered and saved with the snapshot. Third, the snapshot and its related
observations are automatically added to the match report for sharing.
Example 4 In the Pie Meter view of the match (see Figure 3 (a))
we noticed a preponderance of bad shots in the first set versus sets two
and three. We confirm this by making two bar chart snapshots: one
for the first set and one for sets two and three combined (see Figure
6). Comparing these two bar chart snapshots, we see that most of the
points in the first set were the result of unforced errors by the players
(indicated by the hollow green and red bars). In sets two and three
there were far fewer unforced errors and more good shots (winners
and forced errors).
Example 5 The Pie Meters in Figure 3 (a) show that there appears
to be a majority of short games in favor of Federer. This is easily
verified using the Game Outcome Filter (Figure 3 (c)). By selecting the
topmost and bottommost pie sectors, we can filter out the close games
so we only see games won easily by one player or the other. In doing
so, we see that, in Figure 3 (b), Federer won 15 games easily (including
the first set tie breaker), while Gonzalez only won four games easily.
Example 6 To finish out our brief analysis of this match, we use
the Game Win Probability filter in conjunction with the Game Win
filter (see Figure 1 (a)) to identify any “choke” points by the players.
A choke point is one where, despite a significant lead in a game by a
player, the game is lost. Clicking on the lowest pie sector in the Game
Win Probability filter will filter on just those points where Gonzalez
was up 40-0 or 40-15. By also clicking on the Game Win filter to
only show games won by player one (Federer), we are able to quickly
isolate what is perhaps the most critical point in the match. This is
shown in the selected point in a Fish Grid from the first set (Figure
2 (c)). This occurred in the first set where Gonzalez was serving at
40-15 with a chance to win the set. At this point in the match, he
lost four points in a row, allowing Federer to break his serve. From a
game psychology perspective, we see that Federer then won the next
game easily on his serve while Gonzalez had to struggle through seven
deuces to win his serve. This brought the match to a tie-breaker which
was then won easily by Federer.
4.7 Insight sharing and report generation
In the previous sections, we saw that users can record insights by anno-
tating points and bar chart snapshots. Therefore, it is straightforward
for a user to share his or her insights with others since the annotated
video clips and bar chart snapshots are automatically added to a match
report. At the present time, only a rudimentary match report is created
that consists of a simple HTML page containing the text observations
along with their corresponding bar chart snapshot images or links to
the associated video clips. In the next iteration of TenniVis, we plan
to expand and enhance the report generation capabilities by eliciting
feedback from tennis coaches and players concerning what informa-
tion to include and how to include it effectively.
5 PILOT USER STUDIES
To test the effectiveness and usability of the visualizations presented in
TenniVis, we conducted two pilot user studies: one with the women’s
tennis coach and one with the men’s tennis coach at a local university.
Since TenniVis was designed specifically to be used as an interactive
tool for tennis coaches and players, it was important to demonstrate
Fig. 7. Fish Grids for a women’s singles college match. The coach analyzing this match was particularly interested in games 3 and 4 of the second
set (a,b).
that it could be quickly learned by domain experts who don’t neces-
sarily have any expertise in visualizations. The goals of these stud-
ies were as follows: (1) assess the understandability of visualization
graphics (i.e., Pie Meters, Fish Grids, and Bar Charts); (2) assess the
perceived efficiency and effectiveness of TenniVis match analysis; and
(3) elicit opinions on what type of information and features are needed
in the match report (the report generation functions were not in the
system during the studies).
5.1 Procedure
Using a two-monitor display (24 inch external monitor and a 15 inch
laptop monitor), the TenniVis system was setup at the participant’s
work location in a meeting room. The main TenniVis application was
displayed on the external monitor while the laptop monitor was used
to display the pop-up video player window. Each pilot study was con-
ducted in three parts: system demonstration, hands-on match analysis,
and follow-up questionnaire. After a brief introduction in which the
purpose and overview of the study were presented to the participant,
the instructor spent 15 minutes demonstrating the various components
of TenniVis using the Federer-Gonzalez match. Each of the visualiza-
tions and all of the controls were briefly explained to the participant
and any questions were answered. The participant was then allowed
10 minutes to explore the system on their own using the same data set.
In the second part of the study, the instructor opened up one of two
data sets. For the women’s team coach, the data set consisted of a
two set singles tennis match of the best singles player on her team
recorded a few days earlier (shown in Figure 7). For the men’s coach,
the data set was a two-set tennis match for the best singles player on
his team, also recorded a few days earlier. In both cases, the coaches
were present at their respective players’ live matches, although they
were also watching five other matches simultaneously. The participant
was asked to use the TenniVis system to evaluate their player’s match
and to “think out loud” as they performed this task. Participants then
interacted directly with TenniVis as the instructor took notes about
which visualizations and components the participants were using and
the comments they were making. Since the primary goal of the pilot
study was to assess the understandability and usefulness of the visual-
izations, (and not to assess TenniVis as a finished product) the instruc-
tor provided assistance as needed.
After approximately 30 minutes of self-directed interaction with
TenniVis, the instructor presented the participant with a brief ques-
tionnaire. In this questionnaire, the participant assessed the usefulness
and understandability of the overall TenniVis system, the Pie Meters,
the Fish Grids, the Point Outcome Glyphs, the Bar Charts, and the
video player. Assessments were indicated using Likert scale ratings
where users were asked the degree to which they agreed or disagreed
with various statements about the TenniVis system. They also had the
opportunity to indicate what they liked most about the system, least
about the system, and for additional features that would make it more
useful. The results of each of these pilot studies are presented next.
5.2 Pilot Study 1 - Women’s Tennis Coach
When analyzing the women’s tennis match, the coach only spent a few
minutes on the Pie Meter view (which is the default view when the
application is started). She noticed the very high number of service
breaks as indicated by the red and green boxes. She then switched to
the Fish Grid view (see Figure 7). After scanning through all of the
points in order in the Fish Grids, she stopped to more closely examine
games three and four in the second set (Figure 7(a) and (b)).
When zoomed into the second semantic zoom level, she was able to
see the outcomes of each point in these games (represented by lower-
case letters). In game three, she noticed from the Fish Grid how her
player (player one) broke her opponent’s serve with three solid shots
(i.e., two forced errors and one winner) plus an unforced error made
by her opponent. She then noted, however, that her player committed
two double faults and two unforced errors in her next service game
(game four).
Based on prior experience with her player, the participant suspected
that her player may have committed the two unforced errors by trying
to hit too many down-the-line shots (a potentially risky shot) versus
going cross-court. She commented that “I’ve really been trying to
work on her [the player] hitting the ball cross-court more because she
goes down the line and then she either misses it or then they make her
run cross-court. . . so I was immediately thinking ‘How did she lose this
point?”’. She loaded several points one-by-one into the video player
and was able to find several examples that confirmed her hypothesis.
She then decided to focus on serving and, using the zoom slider, fur-
ther zoomed into game four to see more details such as first serves vs.
second serves. From Figure 7(b), she noticed that five of the six points
were from second serves (including two double-faults).
The results of the post-analysis questionnaire indicated that this par-
ticipant did not fully understand the Pie Meters or the bar charts but
found the Fish Grid and video player components very easy to use and
understand. The participant commented that she liked the Fish Grid
view since it was well organized. We attribute this to the fact that the
Fish Grids display all points in the order they occurred and at the game
score where they occurred. She indicated that having the supporting
evidence provided by the video was useful because, “whenever I ask
the girls, ‘How do you learn best? ’, they always say ‘By seeing it;
by seeing what you are talking about”’. She said she liked the fact
that TenniVis allowed her to directly access video clips for points of
interest.
The participant described herself as somewhat averse to technology
and indicated that as the primary reason she did not bother to use any
of the filters or pay attention to the bar charts. She also had some
initial confusion over interpreting the color coding used for the out-
come balls, but indicated that having a key would probably solve this
problem. Despite some of her issues with specific components of the
system, she rated the system overall as easy to understand and use and
strongly agreed that it provided her with useful insights that are not
currently available to her.
The participant indicated that there is the need to generate simple,
compelling reports that communicate her insights in a tangible way
her players can readily grasp. She envisioned some type of electronic
report that would include her observations along with the supporting
video evidence.
5.3 Pilot Study 2 - Men’s Tennis Coach
The men’s tennis coach described himself as a data and statistics junkie
with a firm belief in the power of statistics and analysis to be used as a
Fig. 8. (a) Histogram of a men’s singles college match. The coach
noticed that, even though his player (player one) made fewer unforced
errors (hollow red bar) than the opponent (hollow green bar), these were
not enough to make up for the large number of winners and forced errors
made by the opponent (red solid bars) versus his player (green solid
bars). (b) Eighth game in the second set showing a critical point at 30-0
where the player setup his opponent for a winner.
tool to complement his training program. He was able to quickly grasp
the meaning of the color coding used in the Pie Meters and for the
Point Outcome Glyphs, commenting “the color coding is nice. . . the
red and green is good because that’s intuitive”. In looking at the Pie
Meters from the Federer-Gonzalez match, he commented “it looks like
right off the bat he [Federer] was dictating play. . . because he has a
lot of solid green points which means he’s winning a lot of points”
(as opposed to getting points due to bad shots from Gonzalez). At-
tention was then turned to the Fish Grid view where the participant
commented that “you see kind of trends, up and down. . . and you see
what the momentum looks like”.
Once the data set for his own player was brought up, he immediately
looked at the histogram (see Figure 8 (a)) coupled with the Pie Meter
view to get an overall sense of the difference between the two players
in terms of point outcomes. He commented that “overall, their guy
hit certainly more winners. . . he also had more forced errors and our
guy had less unforced errors. . . our guy doubled less and had a few
more aces. . . but that looks a little negligible in terms of risk/reward”.
He then began using various filter combinations to create individual
histogram snapshots for comparison, noticing that his player had a lot
of points that started from his second serve.
Continuing his analysis after switching to the Fish Grid view, he
noticed a key game in set two when his player was serving at five
games to three (see Figure 8 (b)). He focused in on the point when his
player was up 30-15 (only two points away from winning the set) and
his opponent hit a winner (see Figure 8 (b)). The opponent then was
able to regain the upper hand in the match and ultimately win it. He
analyzed why his player lost this point by selecting it to view in the
video player. He noticed that, although his player served his opponent
with a tough serve out wide, he failed to capitalize on this advantage
and gave his opponent an easy putaway shot at the net. This insight led
the coach to indicate he would discuss shot selection with his player
to avoid giving away the momentum in a match.
The results of the post-analysis questionnaire indicated the partic-
ipant found the system to be very useful and easy to understand. He
agreed strongly that it gave him useful match insights he is not cur-
rently able to get. He commented that, with the system, he can look
at trends and get a visual sense of what was going on. The Pie Me-
ter, Fish Grid, and video player components got very high marks for
usefulness. The participant indicated that, while he liked the ability
to animate the Pie Meter needles to “see what was going on”, he pre-
ferred the Fish Grid over the Pie Meter because it was like a timeline
that presented the ups and downs.
Both the Point Outcome Glyphs and the histograms got neutral
usefulness ratings. The participant explained that the reason for the
lower usefulness score for the Point Outcome Glyphs was that he re-
ally would like to see if the outcome was from a backhand or forehand.
This issue can be addressed by collecting the backhand/forehand infor-
mation in data collection and encoding it in the Point Outcome Glyphs.
He gave several useful suggestions on improving the usability of
the histograms. First, he suggested allowing users to manually select
games to be displayed in a histogram, rather than just relying on the
filters. Second, he suggested a set of pre-defined filter configurations
representing some of the standard statistics, such as service games,
first serves, etc. Third, he recommended displaying actual numbers
of outcomes instead of just percentages. These features were not in
the system during the pilot user studies, but were added later based
on this feedback. He indicated that giving his players actual numbers
instead of just percentages would resonate more with them. Overall,
the participant commented that he liked the fact that there are multiple
ways to visualize the data in TenniVis.
The participant also confirmed the need for generating reports to
communicate his insights to his players. He envisioned being able to
use this system and then generate a report he could tape to a player’s
locker that provided specific insights that player needed to focus on.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present TenniVis, a novel tennis visualization sys-
tem. It demonstrates how visualizations useful for tennis coaches and
players can be generated using only the easily collected non-spatial
game data and a video from a consumer level camera. Two new visual
metaphors, namely the Pie Meter and the Fish Grid, are proposed and
implemented in TenniVis. They convey summary and detailed infor-
mation about a match in an organized way that is understandable by
users with tennis domain expertise. The multi-resolution visualization
pipeline, dynamic query capabilities, and ad hoc hypothesis develop-
ment and testing capabilities provided by TenniVis make it an effective
tool for tennis match analysis.
Through two pilot user studies, we verified that tennis coaches were
quickly able to gain insights into their players’ tennis matches through
TenniVis and found the visualizations easy to use and understand.
With only a minimal amount of training, coaches were able to interact
with TenniVis to confirm suspicions they already had about a tennis
match and to find new insights. They were excited about the prospect
of having a tool to help them share their observations with their play-
ers. One of the coaches actually contacted us after the study to request
a copy of the Fish Grid view for her player.
While we have demonstrated the utility of TenniVis to analyze in-
dividual matches, we plan to expand it to be able to visualize multiple
matches in order to see longer term trends. This may also then lead
to the need to view multiple video segments simultaneously. For ex-
ample, a coach may want to view specific video segments before a
coaching intervention is made and then after to see if the advice given
was followed by a player. We plan on working with coaches to deter-
mine how to most effectively capture their analysis findings and com-
municate them to their players. We also plan to work with players to
determine their ability to grasp the meaning of the visualizations and
to see if they can find useful insights in their own games.
We acknowledge the insightful benefits provided by systems relying
on tracking data and see our efforts as complementary to them. In
the future, we would like to extend TenniVis for professional players
by integrating the visual analytics of tracking data. In addition, we
would also like to explore whether the visualizations in TenniVis can
be applied to other sports such as table tennis and badminton, since
they have structures similar to tennis.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Daniel Keim for his
timely suggestions on improving the visualizations presented in this
paper. We would also like to thank the reviewers for their highly con-
structive feedback that allowed us to fill several key gaps. This work is
partially supported by National Science Foundation under grant num-
bers IIS-1352893 and IIS-1352927.
REFERENCES
[1] Dartfish sports analysis software. http://www.dartfish.com/, 2013.
[2] Information about a tennis court from Wikipedia.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tennis court/, 2013.
[3] MotionView Tennis Video Analysis Software.
http://www.tenniscoachsystems.com/, 2013.
[4] ProTracker Tennis Software. http://www.protrackertennis.com/, 2013.
[5] IBM SlamTracker used at the 2014 Australian Open.
http://www.ausopen.com/en AU/slamtracker/, 2014.
[6] USTA Friend at Court 2014. http://www.itatennis.com/, 2014.
[7] C. Ahlberg, C. Williamson, and B. Shneiderman. Dynamic queries for
information exploration: An implementation and evaluation. In Proceed-
ings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 619–626. ACM, 1992.
[8] R. Borgo, J. Kehrer, D. H. Chung, E. Maguire, R. S. Laramee, H. Hauser,
M. Ward, and M. Chen. Glyph-based visualization: Foundations, design
guidelines, techniques and applications. In Eurographics 2013-State of
the Art Reports, pages 39–63. The Eurographics Association, 2012.
[9] C. O´. Conaire, P. Kelly, D. Connaghan, and N. E. O’Connor. Tennissense:
A platform for extracting semantic information from multi-camera tennis
data. In Digital Signal Processing, 2009 16th International Conference
on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2009.
[10] D. Connaghan, P. Kelly, and N. E. O’Connor. Game, shot and match:
Event-based indexing of tennis. In Content-Based Multimedia Indexing
(CBMI), 2011 9th International Workshop on, pages 97–102. IEEE, 2011.
[11] A. Cox and J. Stasko. Sportsvis: Discovering meaning in sports statis-
tics through information visualization. In Compendium of Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 114–115, 2006.
[12] K. Goldsberry. Courtvision: New visual and spatial analytics for the nba.
MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2012.
[13] L. Jin and D. C. Banks. Visualizing a tennis match. In Information Vi-
sualization’96, Proceedings IEEE Symposium on, pages 108–114. IEEE,
1996.
[14] P. A. Legg, D. H. Chung, M. L. Parry, M. W. Jones, R. Long, I. W. Grif-
fiths, and M. Chen. Matchpad: Interactive glyph-based visualization for
real-time sports performance analysis. In Computer Graphics Forum,
volume 31, pages 1255–1264. Wiley Online Library, 2012.
[15] J. Mackinlay. Automating the design of graphical presentations of re-
lational information. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 5(2):110–
141, 1986.
[16] J. Muthukumarasamy and J. T. Stasko. Visualising Program Executions
on Large Data Sets Using Semantic Zooming. Graphics, Visualization &
Usability Center, College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Technical Report GIT-GVU-95-02, 1995.
[17] N. Owens, C. Harris, and C. Stennett. Hawk-eye tennis system. In IEE
conference publication, pages 182–185. Institution of Electrical Engi-
neers, 2003.
[18] C. Perin, R. Vuillemot, and J.-D. Fekete. Soccerstories: A kick-off for vi-
sual soccer analysis. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Trans-
actions on, 19(12):2506–2515, 2013.
[19] H. Pileggi, C. D. Stolper, J. M. Boyle, and J. T. Stasko. Snapshot: Vi-
sualization to propel ice hockey analytics. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 18(12):2819–2828, 2012.
[20] G. Pingali, A. Opalach, and Y. Jean. Ball tracking and virtual replays for
innovative tennis broadcasts. In Pattern Recognition, 2000. Proceedings.
15th International Conference on, volume 4, pages 152–156. IEEE, 2000.
[21] G. Pingali, A. Opalach, Y. Jean, and I. Carlbom. Visualization of sports
using motion trajectories: providing insights into performance, style, and
strategy. In Proceedings of the conference on Visualization’01, pages 75–
82. IEEE Computer Society, 2001.
[22] G. S. Pingali, Y. Jean, and I. Carlbom. Lucentvision: A system for en-
hanced sports viewing. In Visual Information and Information Systems,
pages 691–698. Springer, 1999.
[23] C. Plaisant, J. Grosjean, and B. B. Bederson. Spacetree: Supporting ex-
ploration in large node link tree, design evolution and empirical evalua-
tion. In Information Visualization, 2002. INFOVIS 2002. IEEE Sympo-
sium on, pages 57–64. IEEE, 2002.
[24] E. Tufte. Sparklines: Intense, simple. Word-Sized Graphics, 2004.
[25] M. O. Ward. A taxonomy of glyph placement strategies for multidi-
mensional data visualization. Information Visualization, 1(3-4):194–210,
2002.
[26] M. O. Ward. Multivariate data glyphs: Principles and practice. In Hand-
book of Data Visualization, pages 179–198. Springer, 2008.
[27] C. Williamson and B. Shneiderman. The dynamic homefinder: Eval-
uating dynamic queries in a real-estate information exploration system.
In Proceedings of the 15th annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information retrieval, pages 338–346.
ACM, 1992.
[28] G. Zhu, C. Xu, Q. Huang, W. Gao, and L. Xing. Player action recognition
in broadcast tennis video with applications to semantic analysis of sports
game. In Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM international conference
on Multimedia, pages 431–440. ACM, 2006.

