1Newdle: Interactive Visual Exploration of Large
Online News Collections
Jing Yang, Dongning Luo, and Yujie Liu
Dept of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
jyang13, dluo2, yliu39@uncc.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we present a novel visual analytics
system named Newdle with a focus on exploring large online news
collections when the semantics of the individual news articles have
already been tagged. Newdle automatically conducts clustering
and relation analyses on news articles and builds visualizations
and supports interactions upon these analyses. By providing
a novel topic overview in which the semantics and temporal
features of the significant article clusters in a large collection are
intuitively displayed, Newdle allows users to grasp the content of
the collection in a glance. Through the rich set of interactions and
visualizations provided by Newdle, users can effectively conduct
in-depth analyses on topics, tags, and articles of interest. We
have implemented a fully working prototype of Newdle, using
the online New York Times RSS feeds as its example data input.
We present several case studies to illustrate the effectiveness and
efficiency of Newdle.
Index Terms—Online News, RSS, visualizations, text analysis,
wordle, graph, visual analytics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large amounts of news articles are released on the internet
by newspapers, television news channels, and independent
journalists that went online. Online news is an important
information source since it provides timely, ambient infor-
mation to not only the masses, but also business and po-
litical policy makers, social scientists, and analysts in other
application domains. Online news is also an overwhelming
information source. For example, The New York Times (NYT)
(http://www.nytimes.com) delivers thousands of news articles
in less than one month.
With the extremely large volume of online news, there is
an urgent need for tools that allow users to effectively and
efficiently browse topics, detect temporal trends, and search
news of interest from this data source. Toward this end,
numerous text analysis approaches, such as automatic news
summarization (see [6] for an overview), have been conducted
to automatically extract valuable information from large online
news collections. However, even after such analyses, the
amount of information to be delivered to users is still huge. It
is challenging to effectively and efficiently transfer the large
amount of automatic analysis results to users.
To address this challenge, visual analytics approaches [10]
that tightly integrate automatic analysis and interactive visual
exploration are promising. Such approaches use interactive vi-
sual interfaces to facilitate analytical reasoning so that human
perception abilities and domain knowledge can be exploited
together with computational powers to facilitate the reasoning
process. Although there exist a few online news readers that
employ automatic text analysis and use visualizations as their
main interfaces, much more efforts need to be made to promote
visual analytics in the important application of online news
exploration. We argue that the following challenges are yet
to be addressed for effective and efficient online news visual
analytics:
• To use intuitive visual metaphors: Most persons who read
or analyze online news are not visualization experts. The
visual metaphors used for online news visual analytics
approaches must be intuitive to the novice users;
• To convey semantic information: Online news is distinct
from numeric data in that they contain rich semantic
information. Effective online news visual analytics ap-
proaches should be able to transfer a large amount of
semantic information to users in an instance.
• To be scalable: A small number of news articles can
be explored in a simple text interface without any
automatic analyses. The value of visual analytics ap-
proaches should be reflected in its better capability to
support users in exploring large online news collections
through information-intensive displays and interactive ex-
plorations powered by automatic analyses.
• To support interactive, in-depth analyses: Visual analytics
approaches should allow users to conduct a wide range
of in-depth analyses on large online news collections ac-
cording to their particular interests by tightly integrating
automatic text analyses and interactive visual exploration.
In this paper, we propose a novel online news visual analyt-
ics system toward addressing the above challenges. It is named
Newdle, which stands for News Wordles, since wordles [11]
are its major visual metaphor. Because extensive research has
been conducted on automatic entity extraction and document
summarization, we focus on exploration of large online news
collections with an assumption that the individual news articles
have been perfectly described by their tags. This assumption is
reasonable since many online news sources provide manually
generated tags for their news articles in the RSS entries.
For example, the online news articles provided by NYT are
manually tagged by library scientists with tags drawn from
a normalized indexing vocabulary of people, organizations,
locations, and topic descriptors. It is not hard to extend our
approach to visualize untagged news by integrating existing
entity extraction and document summarization algorithms.
2Newdle conducts automatic clustering and path analyses
upon networks composed of articles and tags. It uses wordles
[11], the tag-cloud like, space efficient, and attractive visual-
izations, to visually depict the semantic information of article
clusters. It also uses line graphs overlaid on the wordles to
visually convey the temporal trends of the clusters. A rich set
of visualizations and interactions are provided in Newdle to
allow users to perform the following in-depth visual analyses
on large online news collections:
• Topic analysis: In this paper we define a topic as a cluster
of articles that are closely related in content. Newdle
automatically detects significant topics from a news col-
lection and allows users to visually browse their semantic
information and temporal trends in an information rich
overview (See Figures 1 and 2 for examples). Newdle also
allow users to examine the topics in detail (see Figure 3)
and investigate topics related to a topic of interest (see
Figure 4).
• Tag analysis: Attractive visualizations are used to en-
courage users to explore the most significant tags in a
news collection. The visualizations present the tags within
their semantic context so that the users can learn much
about the tags before conducting any interactions. With
interactions, the users can investigate tags of interest in
more depth. For example, they can search articles and
topics by tags, search tags related to a tag of interest,
and even compare two tags with regard to the articles and
topics they are involved in. Figure 5 gives an example of
searching articles by tags. Figure 6 gives an example of
tag comparison.
• Article analysis: Newdle allows users to search articles
of interest by tags and topics. It also allows users to
do extended reading for articles of interest, in which the
users can access not only articles that share tags with the
focus articles, but also articles that are indirectly related to
the focus articles. Figure 7 gives an example of extended
reading.
We have implemented a fully working prototype of Newdle,
using the online NYT RSS feeds (a widely used data format
for providing users with frequently updated content) as the
example data source. Our case studies illustrate that our
prototype is fun to use, effective, and efficient.
We discuss the related work in Section II. In Section III, we
provide an overview of Newdle. In Section IV, we introduce
the data extraction process in Newdle. In Section V, we
describe the construction and automatic analyses of the article
and tag networks. In Section VI, we describe the visualizations
and the interactions in Newdle. In Section VII, we present a
few case studies. In Section VIII, we draw our conclusion and
present the future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Newdle is related to two categories of previous work. The
first one is online news visual exploration and the second one
is visual analytics of large document collections.
There exist multiple efforts on visually exploring online
news. Among them, Newsmap (http://newsmap.jp/) uses a
treemap to visually present the automatic news article clus-
tering results from Google News (http://news.google.com/).
Each cell in the treemap represents a news cluster and its
size is determined by the amount of related articles in the
cluster. Titles of articles are displayed within the cells. Google
News Timeline (http://newstimeline.googlelabs.com/) is a web
application that organizes search results chronologically. It
allows users to view news and other data sources on a brows-
able, graphical timeline. Narratives [4] tracks the attention
to a news article in the form of references in social media
(such as weblogs). It uses line graphs to visualize ways that
concepts have changed over time and explore how those
concepts relate to each other. VisGets [3] uses coordinated
geospatial, temporal, and topical views to allow users to
interactively explore online news. The users can find topics
of interest through dynamic search queries. FeedDemon [1]
is commercial software that allows users to read news in a
text interface, tag news of interest, watch for news of interest,
search news, and share news of interest with friends. Newdle
is different from the existing approaches in that it provides
a rich set of interactions to support many in-depth analysis
tasks based on an underlying article network and an article-
tag network.
There exist many efforts on visually exploring large doc-
ument collections. For example, IN-SPIRE [12] employs
clustering analysis and depicts hot topics in large document
collections using the mountain and galaxy metaphors. The
semantic information of the hot topics is displayed as labels.
ThemeRiver [5] uses a river metaphor to depict the thematic
strengths of significant keywords in large document collec-
tions. TRIST [7] allows analysts to formulate, refine, organize,
and execute queries over large document collections. Its multi-
pane view allows users to examine search results from different
perspectives, such as clustering, trend analysis, comparisons,
and difference. Jigsaw [9] is a visual analytic system that
provides multiple coordinated views of document entities with
a special emphasis on visually illustrating connections between
entities across the different documents. COPLINK [2] presents
a hyperbolic tree view and a springembedder graph layout
of relevant entities to help law enforcement officials extract
information from police case reports and analyze criminal net-
works. Different from the above approaches, Newdle presents
the major topics in a document collection and their temporal
trend using wordles combined with temporal overlay lines.
It supports a wide range of visual analytics tasks making
use of the underlying article and article-tag networks without
explicitly displaying the networks.
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Newdle is a C++ program using WXWidgets for its GUI
and Mysql for its data storage. It contains three compo-
nents, namely the data extraction component, the network
construction and analysis component, and the visualization and
interaction component. We briefly describe them as follows:
• Data extraction component: Newdle automatically
fetches news article entries from the NYT RSS feeds
through Google Reader (reader.google.com). Google
3Reader provides a standardized XML format for the
RSS and caches news article entries for up to 30 days.
Newdle uses a XML parser to analyze the retrieved entries
to get the tags, titles, time stamps, and summaries of
the news articles and the hyperlinks through which the
original news articles can be accessed. The information
is stored in a Mysql database and used by the other two
components.
• Network construction and analysis component: New-
dle constructs an article network and a bipartite article
and tag network (article-tag network in short) to support
the overview first, zoom in for detail visual exploration
paradigm proposed by Ben Shneiderman and a wide range
of visual analytics tasks. Clustering and path analyses are
conducted on the networks for detecting hot topics and
exploring relations among tags and articles. Their results
are used to construct visualizations in the visualization
and interaction component.
• Visualization and interaction component: Multiple co-
ordinated views are implemented in Newdle. The system
starts from a category index in which users can set a time
period and select a news category of interest to define a
news collection. A topic overview (see Figure 1 for an
example) is then displayed in which the hot topics in
the collection are visually presented. The semantics of
the topics are displayed in wordles and their temporal
features are overlaid on the wordles as line graphs. Users
can conduct interactions such as relevant tag selection,
topic selection, and tag comparison on this view. Most
of the above interactions will trigger a variation of
the detail view. In the detail view, multiple topics are
displayed in rows, where their wordles and html boxes
displaying an index of their articles are displayed. The
detail view is used to present the results of article search,
tag comparison, extended reading, and topic investigation
(see Figures 3, reftopicext, 5, 6, and 7 for examples).
Finally, a html browsing window is opened to display an
online news article when its title is clicked in the detail
view.
We describe these components in detail in the following
sections.
IV. DATA EXTRACTION COMPONENT
Newdle can populate its database manually or automatically.
In the manual mode, Newdle updates the database by fetching
the NYT news article entries from Google Reader upon the
request of users. In the automatic mode, Newdle automatically
updates the database in a time interval defined by the users.
Newdle keeps track of the latest update time so that entries
already stored in the database will not be retrieved for another
time. Users can define a life threshold. News entries older than
this threshold will be removed from the database. Users can
visually explore any news articles whose entries are in the
database through Newdle.
V. NETWORK CONSTRUCTION AND ANALYSIS
COMPONENT
Newdle constructs an article network and an article-tag
network for the news articles under exploration. They explic-
itly define the relations among tags and articles. Automatic
analyses are conducted on these networks for generating the
visualizations and conducting the interactions.
A. Article Network
The article network describes the relations between the
articles in a news collection. Each article is a vertex in this
network. There exists an undirected, unweighted edge between
two articles if and only if the articles share more tags than
a given threshold, named the article relation (AR) threshold.
The edge indicates that the articles are directly related. We
allow users to interactively change the AR threshold to define
the relations more strictly or more loosely, which will finally
lead to topics of finer or coarser granularities. Note that the
relations can be measured in other ways. We choose this
simple approach since this measure is easy to understand and it
is easy for users to change the topic granularities by adjusting
the AR threshold.
We conduct the topic analysis upon the article network. In
particular, graph clustering is conducted on the network. Graph
clustering is the task of grouping the vertices of the graph
into clusters taking into consideration the edge structure of the
graph in such a way that there should be many edges within
each cluster and relatively few between the clusters [8]. There
is a large body of literature on graph clustering algorithms.
The particular method used for graph clustering is however not
relevant to this paper. We use the clustering algorithm provided
by igraph (http://igraph.sourceforge.net) but any scalable and
effective graph clustering algorithms can be used.
An article cluster is considered a topic in Newdle. The
semantics of a topic is defined as the most shared tags among
the articles in the cluster. The temporal feature of a topic is
defined as the number of articles in this cluster over time.
We further define the relevance between topic A and topic
B as the number of edges that connect the vertices in topic
A and the vertices in topic B. We also define the distance
between article A and article B as the length of the shortest
path between them in the article network. They are calculated
upon requests from the interactions.
B. Article-Tag Network
The article-tag network describes the relations between tags
and articles in a news collection. It is a bipartite network in
which an article is connected to each of its tags. Given a tag,
its relevant articles are all the articles connected to it. To find
tags that are relevant to a given tag, we first select all the
articles connected to the given tag, and then find all the tags
connected to them.
VI. VISUALIZATION AND INTERACTION COMPONENT
In this section, we first discuss wordles, the major visual
metaphor used in Newdle, and then present the visualizations
and interactions in Newdle.
4A. Wordles
The major visual metaphor used in Newdle is wordles [11].
Wordles are attractive, tag cloud like visualizations that pack
a large number of tags with varying font sizes and colors
into a small screen space. User studies conducted by Viegas
et al. [11] suggested that wordles have emotional emphasis,
colors, and layout that enhance the meaning. They are attention
keeping visuals that catch the attention of people. They also
encourage users to explore the most significant tags in them.
Wordles seem suitable visualizations for online news since
they address our online news visualization challenges well: we
need intuitive visual metaphors and wordles are easy to under-
stand, fun to use, and attractive to users; we need to convey
semantic information and wordles display tags; we need to
display large amounts of information and wordles are space
efficient; wordles attract user attention to the most significant
tags and thus they help users perform visual analytics tasks
such as finding significant tags.
In our approach strong semantic meanings are attached to
the wordles. First, in the Newdle views, each wordle represents
the semantics, namely the most shared tags, of an individual
news topic. In such a wordle, the tags convey the when,
where, who, why, and what information about the topic being
represented so that users can learn them in a glance. The
semantic meanings of the individual tags are clear in such a
context. Using wordles in this way significantly distinguishes
our approach from many existing approaches where tag clouds
are used to display a set of not necessarily related tags.
Second, each tag is associated with a tag category, such
as location, person, organization, and topic (the categoriza-
tion is provided by NYT). We assign a unique color to all
tags of the same category to distinguish tags of different
categories and help user focus on tags of a category of
interest. A qualitative color scheme provided by ColorBrewer
(www.colorbrewer2.org) is used. As stated in ColorBrewer,
qualitative schemes are best suited to representing nominal or
categorical data and the hues are used to create the primary
visual difference between classes. For example, in Figure 1,
all location tags are in gold and all person tags are in purple.
A user interested in location tags can thus look for gold tags
in the wordles.
Third, the size of a tag in a wordle is proportional to the
number of articles with this tag in the topic. Thus big tags,
namely the significant tags in a topic, easily catch the eyes of
users.
To reveal the temporal trends of a topic, we overlay a
line graph on a wordle to reveal the daily number of articles
published on this topic (see Figure 1 for an example). The line
graphs in different wordles use the same scale to allow users
to compare the topics with regard to their strengths over time.
For example, we can immediately notice significant, bursty
topics in Figure 1.
B. Visualizations
Newdle has three basic views, namely the category index,
the topic overview, and the detail view.
Category Index: Users start their visual exploration in
Newdle from the category index. In this view, they set up three
important parameters for the following visual exploration,
namely the time period, the news category, and the AR
threshold.
The time period and the AR threshold can be set through
the menu bar of the category index. The default time period is
set to be from 30 days ago to present, during which the news
entries are guaranteed to be accessible. Users can interactively
change the time period. It can be within the default time period
or beyond it if the data is available in the database.
The default AR threshold is set to be 2. In other words,
articles sharing two or more tags are considered to be directly
related. Users can change this threshold for changing the topic
granularity. In the case study presented in Section VII, the
topic granularity is interactively changed.
In the canvas of the category index, news categories that are
available from NYT online RSS feeds, including world news,
US news, business news, technology news, sports news, and
health news, are listed. A wordle is displayed for each category
to help users select a category of interest. It displays the most
frequent tags in that category during the selected time period.
By clicking a category name, a news collection is defined
and its topic overview will be displayed to the users. The
users can always go back to the category index to change the
three parameters and start a new exploration. In the following
sections, when we talk about a news collection, we mean the
collection defined by the current time period and the category
of interest.
Topic Overview: The topic overview allows users to browse
the significant topics in the news collection to learn their
semantics and temporal features in a glance. Many interactive
explorations, such as topic analysis and tag analysis, can be
conducted in or triggered from this view.
To generate this view, the article network is first constructed
upon the news collection using the given AR threshold.
Clustering is conducted on the article network. The resulting
article clusters are topics to be explored. We sort the topics by
the number of articles in them in descending order. A wordle
(see Section VI-A) is then generated for the biggest topics and
displayed in the overview in a line by line manner following
the order. Figure 1 shows an example topic overview. We will
discuss the interactions upon this view in Section VI-C.
Detail View: The detail view has multiple variations ac-
cording to the function it serves. The basic form of the detail
view (see Figure 3 for an example) has multiple rows in it,
each for a topic. The left side in a row is the wordle of the
topic. The right side in a row is a html box in which the titles
and tags of the news articles are displayed in a list. The colors
of the titles range from white to blue to indicate their ages:
the more bluish, the older the news article is. The order of
the titles in the list is also related to their ages. By clicking
the show detail tag in a html box, more information about
the articles, such as their time stamps and summaries, will be
displayed. A user can click a title to open a html browsing
window in which the original news article is displayed.
The detail view has five variations, namely the detail view
of topics, the search result view, the topic investigation view,
5the tag comparison view, and the extended reading view. We
will discuss them in Section VI-C.
C. Interactive Visual Analysis
Newdle supports users in conducting in-depth visual anal-
yses on topics, tags, and individual news articles, which are
introduced as follows.
1) Topic Analysis: Organizing news articles into topics
allow users to explore a large news collection effectively and
efficiently. Newdle provides the following interactions to allow
users to analyze topics:
• Topic browsing in the overview: The significant topics
are displayed in the topic overview as wordles (see Figure
1 for an example). The sizes of the wordles are fixed to
make sure that the tags in them are readable. When there
are more wordles than a screen can hold, a scrolling bar
is provided so that users can navigate in a canvas larger
than the screen space.
• Topic browsing in the detail view: In the detail view
of topics (see Figure 3 for an example), the significant
topics are displayed in the same order as in the topic
overview, with their detail html boxes displayed besides
the wordles. Users can browse the titles of news articles
in the topics, access news articles of interest, and start
extended reading from this view.
• Topic reconstruction: If users are unsatisfied with the
granularity of the topics, they can adjust the AR threshold
to reconstruct the topics. For example, if a user finds that
many unrelated articles are included in the same topic,
she can increase the AR threshold to construct topics with
more coherent content. Figures 1 and 2 shows two topic
overviews on the same news collection with different AR
thresholds.
• Topic investigation: Users can examine a topic in detail
and investigate its relevant topics in the topic investigation
view. It is triggered by double clicking a topic of interest
from the topic overview. Figure 4 shows an example. In
this view, the topic of interest (TOI) is placed in the
top row. The other rows display topics relevant to the
TOI, sorted by their relevance to it. In their html boxes,
there are star symbols in front of the titles. They indicate
how the articles are related to the TOI: A 3 star symbol
indicates that the article is directly connected to one or
more articles in the TOI. A 2 star/1 star symbol indicates
an indirect connection with a distance of 2 /3 in the article
network. The titles are first sorted by their stars and then
by their ages.
2) Tag Analysis: Users can find significant tags by looking
for big tags from the wordles in the topic overview. Beside this
manual inspection approach, Newdle provides the following
interactions for conducting in-depth tag analyses:
• Selecting tags: Users can first select a set of tags from
the wordles and then conduct other operations upon the
selection. Selected tags are highlighted by red surround-
ing boxes. A tag can be manually selected/unselected. In
particular, when users hover over a tag in the wordle, a
white surrounding box of the tag will be displayed. Users
can then press the mouse button to change the selection
status of the tag.
Newdle can automatically select tags relevant to a set
of tags of interest (KOIs). To trigger this operation, users
first add the KOIs into the current selection and then click
a relevant tag search button. To perform the selection,
the system will first use the article-tag network to find
articles with the KOIs. For each article found, its tags in
the wordle of the topic to which this article belongs will
be added into the current selection. In Figure 2, the tags
in yellow background were selected using a relevant tag
search starting from the tag Haiti. Note that the same tag
can be selected in multiple wordles. That a tag is selected
in one wordle does not mean that it is also selected in
other wordles. Users can clear the selection by clicking
a button.
• Searching articles by tags: Users can click a search
button to search articles with all or any tags in the current
selection. The search results are displayed in the search
result view, as shown in Figure 5. It displays the research
results of the tag Haiti. In this view, each row is a topic
containing one or more resulting articles, sorted by the
number of search results they contain in descending order.
Only resulting articles are displayed in the html boxes,
with the tags searched highlighted by italic.
• Marking tags: Several buttons with different colors are
provides for marking selected tags. By clicking such a
button, the background color of the tags in the current
selection will be changed to the color displayed on the
button, namely that they are marked in that color. For
example, the tags related to Haiti are marked in yellow
background in Figure 2. Users can start a new search
after they mark the tags in the current selection. Thus
they can compare the results of multiple selections by
marking their results in different colors. Marked tags can
also serve for guiding users in finding topics of interest.
• Comparing two tags: When there are two tags selected,
users can click the tag comparison button to trigger the
tag comparison view to find the relation between the tags.
Figure 6 shows the tag comparison view for tags Yemen
and Abdulmutallab, Umar Farouk. On the top of the view,
the two tags being compared are displayed. We call the
tag on the left tag 1 and the other one tag 2. Articles with
both tags or any of the tags are displayed in their topics.
In the html boxes, there are two circles in front of each
title. The left one is filled with color if the article has tag
1, and is empty if it does not have tag 1. The right one
indicates whether the article has tag 2 in the same way.
3) Article Analysis: We allow users to conduct extended
reading for an article of interest. By checking the button on the
left of an article in a detail view, users can define the article as
an Article Of Interest (AOI). They can then click the extended
reading button to trigger the extended reading view for the
selected article. Figure 7 shows an example of the extended
reading view. The top row displays the AOI. The other rows
display articles that are directly or indirectly connected to the
AOI in the article network, organized by their topics. The star
6symbols indicate the distance from an article to the AOI. A
symbol with three stars/two stars/one star means a distance of
1/2/3.
VII. CASE STUDIES
We present a few case studies in this section to illustrate how
Newdle can be used. The news collection under exploration
is the NYT world news from 12/17/2009 to 1/19/2010. There
are 917 news articles in this collection.
A. Haiti Earthquake
In this case, we start from the topic overview shown in
Figure 1. The top right wordle catches our eyes since there
is a big burst in its line graph. By reading its tags, we know
that it is about the Haiti earthquake. We want to make the
topic granularity finer and thus we change the AR threshold
from 2 to 3. A new topic overview is generated, as shown in
2 without the yellow marks. We want to search and examine
topics about Haiti from this view.
We start by highlighting the news topics related to Haiti. To
do it, we click the tag Haiti in a wordle, conduct a relevant
tag search, and mark the selected tags in yellow background.
The resulting display is shown in Figure 2. We notice that
there are three significant topics highlighted by the yellow
background of their tags. The first one is about the disasters
and emergencies in Haiti, the second one is about humanitarian
aid to Haiti, and the third one is about the latest update about
the Haiti earthquake. We then click these topics one by one
to examine them in detail.
We can also use an alternative approach to perform the task.
First, we select the tag Haiti from the topic overview and
search articles with this tag. The search result view is shown
in Figure 5. We find all the topics we noticed above. We also
browse the news titles in the topics and click the titles of
interest to read the articles in full detail.
B. Bombing Attempt on a Christmas Day flight to Detroit
In this case, we investigate the second to the left most topic
in the top row in Figure 2, which seems to be breaking news
according to its line graph.
We start by clicking its wordle from the topic overview
to open a topic investigation view, which is shown in Figure
4. The topic of interest is in the top row. From the line
graph in the wordle, we notice that it burst sometime after
12/17/2009. We drag the scrolling bar of its html box to
examine the earliest news article in this topic. It was published
on 12/26/2009. We click the title to access the original news
article. It talks about a bombing attempt on a Christmas day
flight to Detroit that was prevented by the passengers and crew
members. We then examine more articles in this topic. Most
of them are the follow-ups of this event and articles discussing
security and warning systems and airports and airlines, as
suggested by the wordle. After examining the topic itself,
we browse the relevant topics presented under the top row in
Figure 4. We find that the topic in the second row discusses
Yemen, terrorism, and Al Qaeda and the topic in the third row
was about the reactions of Obama Barack and United States
to this bombing attempt.
We are curious why Yemen was related to the bombing
attempt. To investigate this question, we select the tags Yemen
and Abdulmutallab, Umar Farouk and compare the two tags.
The latter is the name of a person (we learn it from its color)
that appears in both topics. In the tag comparison view shown
in Figure 6, several articles with both tags pop up. By reading
the news with the title Yemen Says Bomb Suspect Met With
Qaeda Figures, we learn that Abdulmutallab, Umar Farouk is
the person who made the bombing attempt and he met with
operatives of Al Qaeda in Yemen before setting out on his
journey.
We can also investigate the event using an alternative
approach. In this approach, we start from the detail view of
the topics, as shown in Figure 3. We select the earliest news
article in this topic, and conduct extended reading for this
news article. The view is shown in Figure 7. It is interesting
to see that the topic in the third row has been there before the
bombing attempt from the line graphs. By examining the html
box, we notice that there are some news articles in this topic
published before 12/26/2009 that are indirectly related to the
bombing attempt. They talk about Yemen and Al Qaeda.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present Newdle, a novel online news
visual analytics system. Its visualizations and interactions are
supported by article network analyses and article-tag network
analyses. By employing the intuitive wordle metaphor to dis-
play semantic information with temporal information overlaid,
the Newdle visualizations effectively transfer the semantics
and temporal features of major news topics in a large news
collection to users. The rich interactions and visualizations
provided in Newdle support users in performing a wide variety
of in-depth analysis tasks, as illustrated in our case studies.
It is important to point out that Newdle is not limited to
exploring online news collections. Other document collections
can also be explored in it. We plan to use Newdle in several
other applications, such as science policy analysis and email
visualization. We will also conduct formal user studies to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of Newdle in the
future.
Acknowledgement. This material is based upon work sup-
ported by National Science Foundation under Grand Award
Number IIS-0946400 and the U.S. Department of Homeland
security under Grand Award Number 2008-ST-108-000002.
Disclaimer. The views and conclusions contained in this
document are those of the authors and should not be inter-
preted as necessarily representing the official policies, either
expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security.
REFERENCES
[1] Feeddemon. http://www.newsgator.com/individuals/feeddemon.
[2] H. Chen, J. Schroeder, R. Hauck, L. Ridgeway, H. Atabakhsh, H. Gupta,
C. Boarman, K. Rasmussen, and A. Clements. COPLINK connect:
information and knowledge management for law enforcement. Decision
Support Systems, 34(3):271–285, 2003.
7Fig. 1. The topic overview with a coarse granularity (the article relation threshold is 2). The biggest 12 topics are shown in the figure. More topics can be
accessed using the scrolling bar on the right of the display.
Fig. 2. The topic overview with a fine granularity (the article relation threshold is 3). A relevant tag selection has been conducted for the tag Haiti and the
selected tags are marked by yellow background. The marked tags highlight the topics about Haiti.
8Fig. 3. The detail view of significant topics.
Fig. 4. The topic investigation view. The topic of focus is displayed in the top row.
9Fig. 5. The search result view. It displays the articles with the tag Haiti.
Fig. 6. The tag comparison view.
10
Fig. 7. The extended reading view. The article of interest is displayed in the top row.
[3] M. Dork, S. Carpendale, C. Collins, and C. Williamson. Visgets:
Coordinated visualizations for web-based information exploration and
discovery. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
14(6):1205–1212, 2008.
[4] D. Fisher, A. Hoff, G. Robertson, and M. Hurst. Narratives: A
visualization to track narrative events as they develop. Proc. IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 115–
122, 2008.
[5] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. ThemeRiver: Visualiz-
ing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, January 2002.
[6] K. Jones. Automatic summarising: The state of the art. Information
Processing and Management, 43(6):1449–1481, 2007.
[7] D. Jonker, W. Wright, D. Schroh, P. Proulx, and B. Cort. Information
triage with trist. Proc. International Conference on Intelligence Analysis,
2005.
[8] S. Schaeffer. Graph clustering. Computer Science Review, 1(1):27–64,
2007.
[9] J. Stasko, C. Gorg, and Z. Liu. Jigsaw: Supporting investigative analysis
through interactive visualization. Information Visualization, 7(2):118–
132, 2008.
[10] J. Thomas and K. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The Research and
Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization and
Analytics Center, 2005.
[11] F. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, and J. Feinberg. Participatory visualization
with wordle. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics, 15(6):1137–1144, 2009.
[12] J. Wise, J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M. Pottier, A. Schur, and
V. Crow. Visualizing the non-visual: Spatial analysis and interaction
with information from text documents. Proc. IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 51–58, 1995.
1Yang, Jing
From: onbehalfof+holly+acm.org@manuscriptcentral.com on behalf of holly@acm.org
Sent: Tuesday, April 27, 2010 7:39 AM
To: Yang, Jing; Luo, Dongning; Liu, Yujie
Cc: cga-ma@computer.org; holly@acm.org; jgardelle@computer.org; dtaylor@computer.org; 
jstout@computer.org
Subject: IEEE CG&A, CG&ASI-2010-01-0015.R1 ,  Decision: Accept
Follow Up Flag: Follow up
Flag Status: Flagged
27?Apr?2010 
 
 
Dear Dr. Jing Yang, 
 
Congratulations! Your above referenced manuscript has been officially accepted for 
publication in IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications’s Special Issue ? Multimedia Analytics,
subject to final editing for English style, clarity, and organization. 
 
In order to publish your article, all of the items listed below must be uploaded to 
ftp://cg&a:tci$420@ftp.ieee?cs.allenpress.com.  (If you encounter difficulty using the link, 
please go to http://ftp.ieee?cs.allenpress.com and login using Username cg&a  Password 
tci$420)  Please create a directory named with your manuscript’s identification number and 
the surname of the corresponding author (CG_CG&ASI?2010?01?0015.R1_Yang) and upload your 
files into it. DO NOT upload these files to ScholarOne Manuscripts. 
 
 
If you are unable to upload your files to the ftp site, email them to Mr. Andy Morton, the 
administrator, at cga?ma@computer.org. Please include your article number and “Final Files” 
in your email subject line. 
 
1. A PDF file of the complete manuscript (with text & figures). Please name this file 
CG_CG&ASI?2010?01?0015.R1_Yang.pdf. 
 
2. Editable electronic file (.doc, RTF, or ASCII—preferably .doc), containing a. entire text 
of the article, including figure captions, table captions, and table entries b. abstract c. 
keywords d. references e. short author bios (current position, research, education, interests
professional memberships) f. complete contact information (mailing address, phone/fax, email) 
of each author 
 
3. Electronic files of figures (TIF or EPS, not embedded within the text file). Please refer 
to our graphics guidelines found at, www.computer.org/magazines/graphics. 
 
4. An electronic copyright release form. To submit your electronic copyright form copyright 
(ECF) , please log in to your Author Center, click on Manuscripts with Decisions, go to the 
last column, "Actions", click on the "Transfer Copyright" button that corresponds with this 
manuscript's log number. Follow the instructions to electronically submit the copyright 
release form to IEEE.  Please forward the PDF of the copyright receipt to , the administrator,
at .  If you encounter any problems signing electronically, then contact , the administrator, 
at , or call for additional assistance. 
 
5. If you intend to use an image that you didn't create (that is, it originally appeared 
elsewhere or someone else created it), you will need to provide permission that you're 
2authorized to use that image to the content editor assigned to work with you on your article. 
The editor will guide you on exactly what that process will entail. 
 
Please be advised that as of 1 June 2009, the IEEE Computer Society has adopted an online?
first publication model, in which we will post a PDF of your accepted article to the Computer 
Society's digital library shortly after receiving all of your publication materials. The PDF 
you submit will be stamped as a “preprint” and sent to the IEEE for posting in Xplore, at 
which point it will be citable as a published article. Once the edited piece appears in print,
that version will replace the preprint in our digital libraries. 
 
If for any reason you would prefer not to have your paper posted as a preprint, please let me 
know within 3 business days of this notice; otherwise, not responding indicates your 
acceptance of our policy. If you opt out of preprints, please name your file folder on the 
FTP site following these conventions: 
CG_CG&ASI?2010?01?0015.R1_Yang_DO_NOT_POST_ONLINE. 
 
Authors of full articles will each receive three complimentary copies. Additional copies may 
be ordered at a nominal and prepress fee of $3 per copy. Your order must be received two 
weeks before the issue goes to press, so please contact your editor for the issue ship date.  
There will be a rate increase for postpress orders. If you are interested in ordering 
additional copies, please visit http://www2.computer.org/portal/web/publications/pre?order. 
 
If you would like to order reprints – minimum quantity is 50 – please see 
http://www2.computer.org/portal/web/csdl/reprints. 
 
Once the production cycle begins, the editor will assign your manuscript to a professional 
editor. The editor will contact you directly to discuss any recommended changes that will 
enhance the presentation of the article. The final editing of the manuscript will be a 
collaborative process in which you and the IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications staff work 
together to achieve a concise, well?worded article. Please note that IEEE Computer Graphics 
and Applications reserves the right to change the title of any paper that is accepted for 
publication. 
 
 
Regards, 
 
Dr. Holly Rushmeier 
Associate Editor in Chief, Special Issues, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 
holly@acm.org 
   
********** 
 
Guest Editor's Comments 
 
Editor 
Comments to the Author : 
(There are no comments) 
 
**** 
 
 

