Integrating visual analysis with ontological knowledge structure
Xiaoyu Wang? Wenwen Dou Seok-won Lee William Ribarsky Remco Chang
Visualization Center, UNC Charlotte
ABSTRACT
Most existing visual analytical tools that incorporate knowledge are
tailored for specific analytical tasks. Although these tools are useful
and powerful, it is often difficult to generalize the approaches uti-
lized in these tools for knowledge incorporation to new problems
or domains. In this paper, we propose a method for integrating a
visual analytical tool with an ontological knowledge structure such
that concepts can be dynamically created or modified through the
ontology while the overall system retains the exploratory capabili-
ties of the visual tools. In order to understand how such integration
is possible, we first examine the roles of the visualization and the
ontology. The relationship between the two then depict a gener-
alizable model that describes the types of communication that are
useful and practical between the visualization, the ontology, and the
user.
1 INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK
The incorporation of knowledge into the process of solving analyti-
cal tasks is a fast emerging area in visual analytics There have been
many notable publications in this new area that demonstrate the
value of integrating domain knowledge into visualization. Ling et
al presented a traffic analysis system to analyze network traffic us-
ing knowledge representation [2]. However, with few exceptions,
the process of knowledge integration utilized in these publications
is often specific to the task or the domain, making it difficult to
generalize into new problem areas.
In this paper, we propose our method to integrate a visual ana-
lytical tool with an ontological knowledge structure such that con-
cepts can be dynamically inserted or modified through the ontology
while the overall system retains the exploratory capabilities of vi-
sual tools. A concept refers to user’s understanding of data, whether
inspired from internal knowledge or external knowledge sources.
For example, when the user is trying to determine the volume of a
cube based on its three dimensions (width, height, length), the con-
cept is in the relationship between the volume and the product of the
three dimensions. This simple concept could then be represented
as an equation and stored in an ontological structure. By utilizing
such concepts in a visualization, an analysis could be performed at
a higher level instead of faithfully representing the original data.
In order to understand how a visualization could be connected to
a knowledge structure to utilize the concepts stored within, we first
examine the functional relationship between a visualization and an
ontological structure. Visualization is commonly accepted to be
useful in exploring data, through which the user could gather infor-
mation and make conclusions based on visual patterns. On the other
hand, an ontology provides an explicit conceptualization (i.e.,meta-
information) that describes the semantics of the data. [1] Similarly,
our ontological structure focuses more on allowing a user to cre-
ate concepts and then later on reusing these concepts to assist the
discovery of inferential information. Although visualization and
?e-mail: xwang25,wdou1,seoklee,ribarsky,rchang@uncc.edu
ontology are seemingly disjoint, we believe that they could com-
plement each other in solving analytical tasks (Figure 1A).
Figure 1: (A) The relationship between visualization and an ontolog-
ical structure (B) A communication model derived from the relation-
ship in Figure 1A
This complementary relationship, as elaborated in section 2, is
the basis of our model, which describes the types of communication
that are useful and practical between the visualization, the ontology,
and the user (Figure 1B).
In the important work by Gilson et al [3], they proposed a well-
defined generalizable approach for automatic generation of visu-
alizations via ontology mapping and applied the approach to web
data. Although both approaches utilize visualization and ontolog-
ical knowledge structure, our approach focuses more on dynami-
cally creating, sharing and storing concepts to support visual ana-
lytical tasks.
In the remainder of this paper, we present our understanding of
the complementary functional relationship between visualization
and ontology in section 2. In section 3, we demonstrate several
possible scenarios and applications of our approach. Finally, we
provide our conclusion and future work in Section 4.
2 FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN VISUALIZATION
AND ONTOLOGY
In order to integrate the visualization with the ontological knowl-
edge structure, we need to understand what their relationship is
and why the integration is meaningful. By examining visualization
and ontological structure separately, we discover a complementary
functional relationship between the two, as shown in the Venn di-
agram Figure 1A, in which orange and blue circles represent func-
tions of visualization and ontological structure, respectively.
As shown in the overlapping region of Figure 1A, both visualiza-
tion and ontological structure share similar functions that could pro-
vide specific information, in the forms of visual selections and data
queries respectively. For example, when searching for risk level
higher than 0.4, the user could either filter the corresponding data
dimension with Parallel Coordinates to location those information,
or equally, they could write a data query directly to the ontology.
(”select * from riskDB where riskLevel > 0.4”).
However, the functions of the visualization and the ontological
structure are not always similar, due to the different ways of inter-
preting and representing information. As mentioned previously, vi-
sualization is good at supporting the exploratory reasoning process,
while ontological knowledge structure focus more on assisting the
user in creating and storing concepts.
For example, when a user wants to explore the interrelationship
of two tuples X and Y, both the visualization and the ontological
structure could provide different yet valid information. Through
interaction with the Parallel Coordinates view, a user could notice
certain trends that indicate Y increases non-linearly with respect to
X, without knowing the exact relationship. Whereas, the ontologi-
cal structure could provide empirical concepts, such as: y = x2 ?5
or y = ?3x3 + 10. Then it is up to user to decide which interrela-
tionship fits better to the visual pattern.
3 IMPLEMENTATION AND VALIDATION
Based on the understanding of the complementary relationship be-
tween the visualization and the ontological structure, we derived a
communication model that would integrate these two components.
Based on this model, we develop a corresponding visual analytics
system, shown in Figure 2 A.
3.1 Model Overview
Figure 2: (A) A prototype system built on the communication model.
(B) Sharing Concepts from Visualization through User to Ontology
(VUO) Process.
In figure 1B, we provide a model for our system, which shows
the communication between the visualization, the ontological struc-
ture, and the user by means of a concept sharing mechanism.The
model is composed of two primary processes. The first is the VUO
process (from Visualization through User to Ontology). In this pro-
cess, the user could gather insights from the visualization, trans-
form the insights into concepts and store them into the ontology for
future reference. The second is the OV process (Ontology to Visu-
alization), in which the ontology shares certain concepts with the
visualization. Although in OV process, the ontological structure di-
rectly communicates with the visualization by sharing concepts, in
the VUO process, the visualization could only indirectly communi-
cate with the ontological structure via the user’s interpretation.
To show the feasibility of our model, we identified two scenar-
ios that demonstrate possible ways in which the model could be
validated.
3.2 Scenarios and Validation
In the first scenario, we examine the plausibility of the OV process,
through a task like ”Show me all bridges over water”. This kind
of semantic tasks could not be directly solved by the visualization
since there is no data labeled as ”bridges over water”. However, us-
ing the OV process in our system, this task is first processed by the
ontological structure, which searches for relevant predefined con-
cepts. Then the ontological structure infers that bridges with type
”Waterway” and ”Structure Type” should be considered as poten-
tial answers, and finally it shares these dimensions and their rela-
tionships as concepts with visualization.
In the second scenario, we validate the feasibility of our VUO
process, which assists the user in creating, verifying and storing
knowledge to ontological knowledge structure, without losing the
exploratory capabilities of the visual analytic tools. For example,
shown in Figure 2B, when using Parallel Coordinates to explore
the four attributes of cubes, like height, length, width, and size, the
relationship between combinations of dimension may not be easily
discovered. However, through VUO process, the user could visu-
ally create a new data dimension, ”Value”, which is the multipli-
cation of height, width and length. By doing this, a one-to-one vi-
sual mapping between ”Value” and ”Size” has been revealed. Then
the new finding is stored in form of a concept into the ontological
knowledge structure.
4 DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the potential benefits gained by integrat-
ing the visualization and the ontology.
First of all, integrating a visual analytical tool and an ontological
structure is one step towards shortening the semantic gap between
the user’s intentions and the visualization, like described in the ex-
ample of ”Show me all bridges over water”(Section 3.1). Due to
the potential semantic gap caused by the visualization’s limitation
on interpreting a user’s questions, the visualization could provide
meaningless information to the user. An ontological structure, on
the contrary, could interpret the user’s questions and search for rel-
evant information, by utilizing its collected concepts. Therefore, by
integrating ontological knowledge structure as an ”interpreter”, the
semantic gap between the user and visualization could be shortened
in system.
In addition, integrating visual analytics tools with the ontologi-
cal structure reduces a certain amount of opportunistic exploration,
through a repeatable and retrievable visual exploratory process. By
inserting new concepts to the ontological structure, findings and
insights during the visual exploration process could be stored and
later reused. Hence, the user’s exploration processes could now be
retrievable and later be repeated if requested. Our system takes ad-
vantages from both the visualization and the ontological structure
and is capable of guiding inspectors through the entire reasoning
task.
5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we present our approach to integrating the visualiza-
tion and the ontology, by utilizing their complementary functions.
We start by understanding the functional relationship between vi-
sualization and ontological structure. Based on which we derive
a model that describes the types of communication that is useful
between the visualization, the ontology, and the user.
In future work, we want to formally evaluate the effectiveness of
the integration of the visualization and the ontology. We would like
to know to what extent this integration could augment the function-
alities of visual analytics tools. In addition, we would like to inves-
tigate the possibility of applying it to multiple ontological structures
and other knowledge sources.
REFERENCES
[1] D.Febsel. Ontologies: A silver bullet for knowledge management and
electronic commerce. Springer-Verlag.
[2] J. L.Xiao and P.Hanrahan. Enhancing visual analysis of network traffic
using a knowledge representatio. IEEE Symposium OnVisual Analytics
Science And Technology, 2006.
[3] P. G. O. Gilson, N. Silva and M. Chen. Fromweb data to visualization
via ontology mapping. EuroVis.Volume 27 (2008), Number 3, 2008.

