Knowledge Integrated Visual Analysis system for in-depth
management of Bridge Safety and Maintenance
Xiaoyu Wanga, Wenwen Doua, Rashna Vatchac, Wanqiu Liub, Shen-En Chenb, Seok-Won Leec
, Remco Changa, William Ribarksya
aVisualization Center, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA
bCivil Engineer Department, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA
cSoftware and Information System, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA
ABSTRACT
Infrastructure safety affects millions of U.S citizens in many ways. Among all the infrastructures, the bridge
plays a significant role in providing substantial economy and public safety. Nearly 600,000 bridges across the
U.S are mandated to be inspected every twenty-four months. Although these inspections could generate great
amount of rich data for bridge engineers to make critical maintenance decisions, processing these data has
become challenging due to the limits from those traditional bridge management systems. In collaboration with
North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) and other regional DOT collaborators, we present our
knowledge integrated visual analytics bridge management system. Our system aims to provide bridge engineers a
highly interactive data exploration environment as well as knowledge pools for corresponding bridge information.
By integrating the knowledge structure with visualization system, our system could provide comprehensive
understandings of the bridge assets and enables bridge engineers to investigate potential bridge safety issues and
make maintenance decisions.
Keywords: Bridge Inspection, Public Safety, Ontological Knowledge Structures, Visual Analytics
1. INTRODUCTION
When the I-35W Minneapolis River Bridge collapsed 13 years ahead of it designed lifetime, in August 2007,?
thousands of people were devastated. This catastrophe caused hundreds of casualties and millions of financial
loses. Although the ultimate cause for this calamity is a design flaw, it alerts us that we could not take the bridge
safety for granted. According to Federal Highway Administration National Bridge Inspections Standards Regu-
lation (NBIS),? all state wide Department of Transportation are required to inspect bridges in their jurisdiction
based on a twenty-four month period. Using these collected bridge information, engineers would then analyze
and score each bridge with an overall sufficiency rating, which will later be considered in their maintenance
decisions.
Since these highly frequent and detailed inspections have generated a great amount of rich reports and
preparatory data, it becomes more and more challenging for bridge engineers to analyze and process these
data with traditional bridge management systems. Due to the growing data size, bridge engineers are facing
challenges to effectively navigate through their data and to locate useful information. Because of this inconvenient
investigation process, potentially, bridge mangers could only get partial understandings about the situation; hence
it becomes difficult for them to make accurate maintenance decisions. More importantly, an accurate decision
also requires the bridge engineers to follow standard procedures with certain domain knowledge. Although
provided with official guidance, due to its complexity, it is still not easy for bridge engineers to completely follow
those rules. Accidentally skipping some procedures may potentially lead to incomplete analysis of the bridges
that affects the maintenance decisions. With all these issues emerging, traditional paper and spreadsheet-based
bridge management systems are no longer sufficient in handling these complex assessment tasks.
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Xiaoyu Wang.)
Xiaoyu Wang: E-mail: xwang25@uncc.edu, Telephone: 1 704 687 8641
Throughout the years, USDOT has funded several universities and research institutions to search for a more
effective and efficient way to perform bridge management.? In our collaboration with NCDOT and other regional
DOTs, we present them our knowledge integrated visual analytics bridge management system to facilitate bridge
engineers to efficiently maintain their bridge assets.
There are two main contributions in our system. First, our system provides a highly interactive data explo-
ration environment that enables bridge engineers to interactively navigate through their large preparatory data
and effectively locate the information they are interested in. Second, our system incorporates an ontological
knowledge structure to preserve and provide bridge inspection information. By integrating these two compo-
nents, our system provides bridge engineers comprehensive understandings of the potential bridge safety issues
and facilitates their decision making processes.
In the remainder of this paper, we give an overview of related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we present
details of our system, followed by presenting and discussing examples in Section 4. We provide our conclusion
and future work in Section 5.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1 The Ontological Knowledge Structure
Ontology is a conceptualization of domain knowledge which comprises concepts, properties and their relation-
ships. A Problem Domain Ontology (PDO) enables solving a complex problem where the underlying domain
concepts have high interdependencies with each other by building up a problem scenario based on concepts,
properties and features defined in the Ontology?.?
One of the research opportunities in our project is to represent the explicit knowledge presented by the DOT
representatives and also capturing the implicit knowledge that bridge engineers gain from their experience and
represent it in a machine-understandable form.
2.2 The Bridge Data
Briefly after the Silver Bridge collapsed into the Ohio River, that resulted in 46 death, in Dec. 15, 1967, the U.S.
Department of Transportation(USDOT) was ordered to by congress to establish a regime for bridge inspection.
The National Bridge Inspection Standards went into effect in 1971 but were limited to bridges on the federal
highway system. In 1980, the inspection rules were extended to all public bridges more than 20 feet long.? Since
then, regional DOTs across the U.S. are required to inspect bridges within their jurisdiction on a 24 month
frequency. All their bridge reports and inspected data are collected by the Federal Highway Administration
(FHWA) and stored in the National Bridge Inventory database (NBI). The NBI contains information on all
bridges and tunnels in the United States that have roads passing above or below. It monitors nearly 600,000
bridges, including Interstate Highways, U.S. highways, State and county roads, as well as publicly-accessible
bridges on Federal lands.
The NBI is developed as a unified database for bridges that includes the identification information, bridge
types and specifications, operational conditions, and bridge data including geometric data, functional descrip-
tion, inspection data, etc. Identification information addresses the bridge location uniquely and classifies the
type of the routes carried out on and/or under the structure and locates the bridge within the spatial location.
Bridge type and specifications classify the type of the bridge. This part provides defined standard categories
for classification of the bridges. It also identifies the material of the bridge components, deck and deck surface.
Operational conditions provide information about the age of the structure as well as construction year, reha-
bilitation year, type of services and traffic carried over and/or under the structure number of the lanes over
and/or under the bridges, average daily traffic, average daily truck traffic and information regarding to bypass,
detours. Furthermore, the bridge inventory contains information regarding to inspection data, ratings assigned
by engineers and appraisal results.
2.3 The Bridge Management Systems
Although several bridge management systems (BMSs) are built on this tremendous amount of data, bridge
engineers are still facing difficulties in navigating through information and locating the ones that they need to
pay attention to. In general, these BMSs are typically built using the spreadsheets approach. For example, the
most widely adopted PONTIS? system uses an excel alike interface. To access the data, bridge managers need
to follow the BMS’s rules on data exploration. They may need to manually set filtering parameters just in order
to access certain ranges of bridge assets information. In addition, using these BMSs, bridge engineers are limited
in reviewing the correlations among those bridges, which could indicate the changes and patterns for the bridges
that are useful to prioritize the maintenance tasks.
Therefore, to facilitate the bridge engineers decision making processes, we present our interactive visual
analytics system that enables them to freely and efficiently explore their bridge data. In addition, by using
advanced visualization tools, our system presents bridge engineers those implicit correlations among different
bridges.
2.4 The Communication Model between visualization and knowledge structure
In our previous work,? we analyzed the functional relationship between visualization and ontological knowledge
structure and present our communication model that could further integrate these two components together.? By
examining visualization and the ontological knowledge structure separately, we found a complementary functional
relationship between these two, as shown in the Venn diagram (Figure1(A)), in which orange and blue circles
represent functions of visualization and ontological structure, respectively.
Both visualization and the ontological knowledge structure share the similar functions on selecting informa-
tion, in the forms of visual data brushing and textual data queries respectively. At the same time, each of them
has their own unique characteristics: visualization is good at supporting the exploratory reasoning process, while
ontological knowledge structure focuses more on assisting the user in creating and storing concepts. A concept
is a set of domain knowledge and procedures that has been or will be created by domain experts.
Figure 1. (A): The Venn Diagram between Ontology and Visualization; (B): The Communication Model
With the understanding of this complementary relationship, we derived a communication model that would
integrate these two components. As shown in Figure1 (B), our communication model is consisted of three impor-
tant parts: the user, the visualization and the ontological knowledge structure. Using a well-designed concept
sharing mechanism, we establish connections among each component. Our communication model contains two
major processes, the Visualization-to-User-to-Ontology (VUO) Process and the Ontology-to-Visualization (OV)
Process. The VUO process is mainly used for the user to create concepts to the ontological knowledge structure,
through interacting with visualization. In this process, the created concepts could either be based on a user’s
experience or the discoveries from visualization. The OV process is dedicated for the ontological knowledge
structure to insert and share concepts with the visualization. This process would guide the visualization to
represent more task-relevant information to the user.
Our communication model serves as the fundamental system design principle that leads us to build our
knowledge integrated visual analytics system.
3. SYSTEM DESIGN
Based on the communication model,? we provide the bridge engineers a knowledge integrated visual analytics
system that provides a comprehensive visual environment for them to investigate potential bridge safety issues and
to make correspondingmaintenance decisions. Shown in Figure 2, our system contains two major components, the
visualization system that provides a highly interactive exploration environment; and the ontological knowledge
structure that preserves and provides corresponding bridge inspections domain information. The integration of
these two is not only flexible in nature for data exploration but also enables the creation and sharing domain
information.
We are currently working with a subset of NBI data collected around Mecklenburg County, Charlotte, between
year 2000 and 2006. This database contains 62 dimensions and several hundred incidents, most of which are linked
with the original inspection reports. In addition to the original data, we collected extensive bridge information
from varies sources, including high resolution fly-over imageries, remote sensing data, and 3D LIDAR data. By
integrating these additional data, our system is capable of showing bridge managers comprehensive information
about their bridge assets.
Figure 2. System Overview: (A) Upper Right: The Parallel Coordinate View; (B) Bottom Right: The Scatter Plot View;
(C) Middle: The Microsoft Virtual Earth View (D) Upper Left: The Knowledge Information Panel
3.1 The Visualization Component
Based on our discussions with NCDOT, we designed our interactive visual analytics system, as shown in Figure
2 to assist bridge managers on depicting data from three aspects: Geospatial, Relational and Details bridge
information. By utilizing each aspect, our system helps the bridge engineers to review their bridge assets from
multiple view points.
Our system utilizes Microsoft Virtual Earth,? as shown in Figure 2(C), to support an interactive geospatial
analysis. The Parallel Coordinate visualization?(Figure 2(A)) and the Scatter Plot visualization(Figure 2(B))
are used to reveal relational information among bridges as well as identifying outliers. Lastly, the details view
incorporates different data sources and provide bridge managers the analysis on a per-asset level. By coordinating
these visualization views, our system could provide the bridge engineers with thorough understandings about
their bridge assets, hence facilitating them to effectively make accurate maintenance decisions.
In order to allow engineers to freely explore bridge information and discover new trends and relationships, our
system adopts a show-on-demand (SOD) multi-window approach that allow the user to generate visualization
windows on-the-fly based on their selections of bridge attributes. All these SOD windows could help the users
to gather and depict bridge information in a highly coordinated manner such that interaction with one of these
windows immediately affects the views of other windows. This SOD multi-window approach is flexible in nature
and allows engineers to inject knowledge of any information at any time. As more information is given to our
system, the system reveals more precise trends and patterns, allowing engineers to reduce irrelevant information
and focus on the desired incidents.
3.1.1 The Geospatial View
Figure 3. Left: (A) The Microsoft Virtual Earth View. Currently looking at the Downtown Charlotte Area. The Green
Icons indicate bridges in good condition, while the Red icons indicate Poor condition Right: (B) The Detail views about
a bridge over water
Our visualization system uses Microsoft Virtual Earth?to help bridge engineers in analyzing the geospatial
aspect of their data. By placing the bridges on this interactive geospatial map, bridge engineers could efficiently
select regions of their jurisdictions and examine the bridges within those regions. In addition, since all the bridges
are categorized using different icons, bridge managers could easily see the distribution patterns. For example, as
shown in the Figure 3(A), the bridge engineers could immediately see that near the downtown area of Charlotte,
there are more bridges in poor conditions(Red icons) than other regions in Charlotte, most of which are in good
condition(green icons).
3.1.2 The Relational View
Our system uses two types of advanced visualizations to help bridge engineers understand the relationships
among their assets. The Parallel Coordinate visualization (PCV)? depicts correlations among different bridge
attributes, and the scatter plot visualization (SPV) shows the relationships between bridges. In PCV(Figure
4(A)) , each curved line represents an individual bridge with their attributes mapped to the vertical axes; in the
SPV, the bridges are mapped to the dots and their distributions are based on their values on the two selected
attributes.
Using these views, bridge managers could easily identify outliers as well as general trends. For example, in
the SPV(Figure 4(B)) , the bridge managers could easily find which bridge is scored with the lowest sufficiency
rating as well as what is the general pattern between the ”sufficiency rating” values and the years that the
bridges were built.
Figure 4. (A): The Parallel Coordinate View with several items highlighted in red; (B): The Scatter Plot View with several
items highlighted
Figure 5. Left: (A)The Details collected from field inspection. We could easily see the supporting structure for this bridge
is severely bent. Right: (B) The Analysis Results from ImageCAT Inc.?
3.1.3 The Details View
The Details view is designed to integrate all collected bridge data together and present bridge engineers a
detailed drill-down view about their assets. For example, as shown in Figure6(B), the Details panel shows
the field inspection results and individual cracks that have been detected and reported. In addition, with the
extensive data source we collected, such as the results from pavement analysis tool ImageCAT?(Figure 5(B)),
the detail view could help the bridge engineers to analyze the bridge asset with external analysis tools. With
all this information, it is easier for bridge engineers to interactively review each bridge and gain comprehensive
understandings of their bridge assets, that could lead to making accurate maintenance decisions.
3.2 The Ontological Knowledge Component
Through repeated interactions with bridge engineers and other domain experts, it was determined that the
domain of bridge inspection is based on a very complex body of knowledge with many internal interdependencies.
To make the correct decision, a bridge engineer has to understand all the factors contributing to his/her decision
making process. Given the vast number of variables involved, bridge engineer can be easily overwhelmed.
To solve this problem, we take an ontology-driven domain knowledge modeling approach?.? The use of this
goal-driven approach is to model the understanding process that underlies the semantics of data and the way
the process is implemented in the proto-type system. The domain knowledge of bridge inspection process is
captured and modeled by using the ontological engineering toolkit (GenOM). GenOM? provides functionalities
to browse, access, query and reason about complex bridge inspection process. GenOM can also benefit bridge
engineers by establishing rules inferred from the knowledge structure. Rules are statements in the form of an
if-then (antecedent-consequent) sentence that describes the logical inferences that can be drawn from an assertion
in a particular form. Rules can be formed by building a problem scenario based on the concepts, properties and
features defined in the ontology, and then respond to the what-if inquires about the behavior of a system by
matching various initial conditions and different circumstances with the rules in the domain model.
Figure 6. Left: (A)The Ontological Knowledge Interface. Currently showing three suggestions for bridge managers to
follow; Right: (B) The GenOM Backend interface
3.3 Communicating Visualization with the Ontological Knowledge Structure
While visual components could assist engineers on exploring collected data, the aforementioned external on-
tological knowledge structure, on the other hand, could provide more specific concepts of bridges. We use the
server-client approach to establish a strong communication with the ontological knowledge structure. The visual-
ization component is the client that will request and pull information from the server side, through a web-service
interface.
In the visualization system, we provide an interactive interface for the bridge engineers to access the ontology
knowledge pools. The ontology provides the bridge engineers with the information that they may take into
consideration during their decision making processes. For example, the ontology may suggest the bridge mangers
to pay more attentions to bridges that have structures underwater for longer than 10 years, as shown in Figure
6. By selecting this suggestion, the bridge engineers would immediately see changes in the visualization views
and therefore starts further investigate on those bridges for water corrosion.
By communicating information between the visualization component and the knowledge component, our
system can now provide bridge engineers not only the ability to freely explore their preparatory data, but also
to guide them through their decision making processes with standard procedures.
4. SCENARIO
In this section, a bridge engineer is trying to understand the distribution pattern of bridges that are built on
top of any water. He starts the system by selecting the corresponding knowledge from the ontology knowledge
interface. By doing so, the system will automatically retrieve information of all the bridges that are built over
water and update this information in all the visualizations that the bridge engineer is currently viewing(the
Geospatial view and Scatter Plot View). Immediately, the distribution pattern is shown to the bridge engineer.
As shown in Figure 3(B), a bridge that is above water is highlighted as opaque icons.
From here, he begins to examine bridges with considerable low sufficiency ratings by filtering and selecting
them on the Scatter Plot view and further bring up details views to understand the cause for those low ratings.
As shown in the detail view (Figure 5(A)), the bridge manage could see that the supporting structure is severely
bent and in bad condition. Finding this immediately draws his attention and could be used to determine future
maintenance schedule.
5. DISCUSSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Although visualization is really powerful in supporting user a highly interactive exploration environment, it is
still quite opportunistic in finding the needed information and does not guarantee repeatable and reusable results.
For example, certain outliers would only occur when other information has been chosen in the same visualization.
This could lead to complex processes as bridge management in the sense that if a bridge engineer need to review
or explain his maintenance decisions, he might not be able to regenerate the same working environment. The
ontological knowledge structure on the other hand, is great at storing reasoning elements and enabling user to
reuse those elements to achieve similar results. These two become very complementary when applied together
to real-world applications.
Therefore, a complex process such as a bridge management cannot solely rely on one of these two methods.
We propose to integrate the visualization and knowledge structure to facilitate comprehensive decision making
processes. Although there are much to be researched on, for example, how and what should be the best way to
automatically improve or construct part of the ontological knowledge structure is still unclear, we are confident
that integrating these two have already enabled the users to perform better on such processes.
At present, our system is still in a developing stage, where we are trying to carefully implement and integrate
all the proposed components together. Currently, although the system can provide engineers reasoning paths
and certain results, the aforementioned knowledge capture component is not ready yet. Therefore, one of our
next steps is to provide a comprehensive knowledge capture interface that would help users to insert and improve
the ontological knowledge structure.
In addition, our current system lacks a formal verification and validation component to authenticate user
created knowledge. Such a component is important in the sense that it could lower the risk of knowledge
duplication and confliction, and to reduce the chance of false knowledge insertion. With further discussion with
ontology experts, we will try to build and integrate this component into the system.
6. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provide a novel knowledge integrated visual analytics system that provides high efficiency in
bridge management. Utilizing visualization and an ontological knowledge structure, our system enables bridge
engineers to effectively examine their preparatory data and facilitate their decision making processes.
We further use a scenario to show how our system could help bridge engineers to effectively discover informa-
tion and make accurate maintenance decisions. We conclude our paper by discussing the possible improvements
for our system and how to extend our collaborative work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is supported by grant number DTOS59-07-H-0005 from the United States Department of Trans-
portation (USDOT), Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA). The views, opinions, findings
and conclusions reflected in this presentation or publication are the responsibility of the authors or presenters
only and do not represent the official policy or position of the USDOT, RITA, or any State or other entity.
The authors also would like to acknowledge the guidance and contributions of Mr. Caesar Singh, the Program
Manager at USDOT; and the technical assistance of Dr. Moy Biswas of the North Carolina DOT (NCDOT),
Mr. Garland Haywoord of NCDOT Division 10, and Mr. Jimmy Rhyne of Charlotte DOT.

