Visualization as Integration of Heterogeneous Processes
Xiaoyu Wanga, Wenwen Doua,William Ribarksya,Remco Changa
aVisualization Center, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, USA
ABSTRACT
In the information age today, we are experiencing an explosion of data and information from a variety of sources
unlike anything that the world has seen before. While technology has advanced to keep up with the collection
and storage of data, what we lack now is the ability to analyze and understand the meaning behind the data.
Traditionally, data mining and data management techniques require the data to be uniform such that a single
process can search for knowledge within the data. However, in analysis of complex tasks where knowledge and
information need to be pieced together from different sources of data, a new paradigm is required. In this paper,
we present a framework of using visual analytical approaches to integrate multiple heterogeneous processes that
can each analyze a specific type of data. Under this framework, stand-alone software solutions can focus on
specific aspects of the problem based on domain-specific techniques. The framework serves as a visual repository
for all the information and knowledge discovered by each individual process, and allows the user to interactively
perform sense-making analysis to form a cohesive and comprehensive understanding of the problem at hand. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework by applying it to inspecting bridge conditions that utilizes data
sources from 2D imagery, 3D LiDAR, and multi-dimensional data based on bridge reports.
Keywords: Heterogeneous Data, Heterogeneous Processes, Visual Analytics, Integration, Sense-Making
1. INTRODUCTION
With people monitoring and collecting data from various sources, a massive amount of heterogeneous data have
been created. Since those sources are not centrally managed, the data do not follow existing or known formats
and often contain conflicting information and knowledge that need special interpretations and representations.
Although certain heterogeneous data could be presented as unified dataset using advanced data managing tech-
niques, it is quite expensive and time consuming to transform and unify them. More importantly, it is probable
that the transformation of data would result in losses of certain original knowledge.
Despite the difficulty in unifying data, the use of heterogeneous data is crucial for investigative tasks and
sense-making processes. This is because complex problems, such as those faced by the Department of Homeland
Security, often require the examination of disparate data sources for the underlying trends or patterns to become
apparent. Due to the limited information carried by a single dataset, utilizing heterogeneous data allows user
to gather more comprehensive information that could lead to a better understanding of the tasks and make
corresponding decisions.
However, the need for examining multiple sources does not imply unifying them into a coherent dataset. In
most real life scenarios, analysts have different tools for foraging different types of data and analyzing them.
Unfortunately, making sense of the results of the analysis from using these tools is often difficult and confusing
without any tools to facilitate the process. In this paper, we present our visual analytics framework that
uses visualizations to integrate heterogeneous processes. Instead of directly managing low-level datasets, our
framework focuses on managing the processes that examine the datasets and collects the resulting analysis of
each process into a coherent comprehensive picture. Each process hosts certain domain viewpoints and provides
the user with a semantic representation of a specific dataset. Our visual analytics system does not require all
processes to be integrated or built by the same system designers. To enable the information sharing between
different processes, our system adopts a communication protocol that is agreed upon by all processes that could
be as simple as passing certain predefined ID numbers or as complex as semantic contents. Each process could
Further author information: (Send correspondence to Xiaoyu Wang.)
Xiaoyu Wang: E-mail: xwang25@uncc.edu, Telephone: 1 704 687 8641
choose to be synchronous or asynchronous to the changes from other processes. With all the integrated processes,
our framework provides the user a comprehensive visual analytics environment to facilitate reasoning tasks.?
In order to prove the feasibility of this framework, we built a prototype system that assists bridge managers at
North Carolina Department of Transportation to perform bridge inspection and analysis. The system integrates
several heterogeneous processes, such as an LIDAR display, an image processing software and an ontological
knowledge structure.
In the remainder of this paper, Section 2 is structured to present the relationship between task and process.
We give an overview of related work in Section 3. In Section 4, we present details of our framework, followed by
presenting and discussing application in Section 5. We provide our conclusion and future works in Section 6.
2. TASKS AND PROCESSES
Solving a complex task can often be accomplished by solving multiple individual sub-tasks. These sub-tasks can
further be categorized in a hierarchical fashion such that the goals and the required actions are specified.?
In this paper, we specifically focus on analytical and investigative tasks, and we refer to the actions taken
towards solving these tasks as processes, which could include the use of individual computer programs or a set
of computer analysis steps. For example, in the counter terrorism field, a task could be the understanding a
group of terrorists’ characteristics and predict their future activities. In this example, individual processes could
include the search for when their last appearances was (by examining temporal information), where was their
last target (through the use of geospatial information) and how did they attacked (through analyzing news and
reports).?
Figure 1. The relationship between Tasks, Processes and Data
An individual process could be designed to analyze a certain type of data. In modern computing, computer
processes have become more specialized in analyzing those preparatory data. For instance, advanced image
analysis tools are used to analyze terrain changes? or longest common string techniques used for searching and
matching gene sequences.? While these advanced processes provide their user deep understanding about a specific
domain, when applied to an investigative task, it is often difficult to piece them together and gain comprehensive
understanding on all facets of the data. These problems are like the challenges faced by criminologists where
the investigators need to manually piece together evidence from various analysis results such as blood samples,
DNA tests or even bone structures. Although each of these results could be effectively calculated by individual
computer process, there is no simple way to efficiently depict every one of them as the amount of information
could be overwhelming. Hence, these manual investigations would take tremendous amount of efforts that could
still sometime result in incomplete analysis, as shown in Figure ??.
Although the most preferable method to obtain comprehensive understandings about the data is performing
these processes on a unified database, it is not always convenient to acquire or retain such database. For one,
it is hard to come up with such unified data schematic. Different data source is collected disparately using
individual data schematics. With the vast diversities in today’s data, it is less common to have experts who
could understand or standardize all these data sources to create such unified database. Secondly, integrating
data together has the potential risk of losing certain contexts when analysis of the preparatory data could only
make sense within those contexts. For example, the characteristics of a terrorist group are frequently tightly
related to its cultural background and the political climate at the time. If analysis on this group is performed
without considering these factors, the result could be quite misleading and potentially unreliable. Lastly, even
when a uniform dataset is available and the context of the analysis preserved, the entire approach of integrating
heterogeneous data sources requires tremendous amount of effort. Given the complex information collected today,
this is a really expensive approach without much guaranteed success.
Therefore, in order to accomplish such analysis tasks, it makes more sense to focus on how to integrate
different processes, but not on the integration of data. Integrating processes that are specialized in different
fields and share their embedded knowledge and results could not only avoid losing analysis context, but also
more effectively depict information of the different facets.
3. RELATED WORK
3.1 Data Integration
While technology has advanced to keep up with the collection and storage of data, we are still limited on the
ability to analyze and understand the meaning behind the data. Traditionally, data mining and data management
techniques require the data to be uniform such that a single process can search for knowledge within the data?
Figure 2. Two Types of typical approaches for Data Integration. Left: (A) A simple data warehouse. The information
from the source databases is extracted, transformed then loaded into the data warehouse. Right: (B) A simple data
integration solution through mediated schema
Data warehousing, as shown in Figure ??(A), is an popular approach in achieving such integrated database.
Although this can be perceived architecturally as a tightly coupled approach, updating the data sources has
the potential of causing an expensive cascading effect. In most cases, after the original data source is updated,
the warehouse will have to be updated through an extraction, transformation and loading (ETL) process.?
Furthermore, it is also difficult to construct data warehouses when you only have a query interface to the data
sources and no access to the full data.
To address this issue, the recent trend in data integration tend to loosen the coupling between data. As shown
in Figure ??(B), the integration idea is to provide a uniform query interface over a mediated schema that allows
passing and sharing transformed queries. Although this is more flexible than the traditional ETL approaches,
it still raises the issue known as the Semantic Integration Problem. This problem is not about how to structure
the architecture of the integration, but how to resolve semantic conflicts between heterogeneous data sources.
A common strategy for the resolution of such problems is the use of ontologies which explicitly defined schema
terms and thus help to resolve semantic conflicts, as mentioned in.?
3.2 Visualizations of Data Integration
Even though the aforementioned two data integration processes could eventually merge different heterogenous
data, the user still does not have the ability to analyze and understand the meaning behind the data. Since each
individual data sources represent different facets of the information, merely examine a data source at a time
would lead to an incomplete understanding.
Researchers in the visualization community has spent a great deal of effort in searching for a good way to
visually integrate such heterogeneous data sources. Keim? proposed a theoretical classification of information
visualization and visual data mining techniques that is based on the data type to be visualized, the visualization
technique, and the interaction and distortion techniques. In practice, Callahan et al? proposed a visualization
system, VisTrail, to perform dynamic data management. In addition, through decoupling the schema of the
underlying data from the specification of a visualization, Cammarano et al? presented an advanced technique to
automatically create visualizations to represent different data aspects.
Although these visualization approaches could assist the user in managing the data sources and depicting them
from different aspects, they still restrain the user’s exploration in a visualization environment. As mentioned
in the previous section, analysis tasks often require a combination of analysis processes from different fields.
Therefore, instead of only analyzing the data using visualization, analysts can more readily utilize the results
from different analysis tools. Hence, we propose a framework to use visualization as an integration of different
reasoning processes.
4. THE FRAMEWORK
Figure 3. The Framework Overview
Since the cost of creating a unified data source could be tremendous, we propose that reviewing and analyzing
multiple data sources does not imply the need to unify them into a coherent dataset. In most analysis tasks,
analysts with different expertise often have specialized tools for foraging those different types of data. The results
from those independent data analysis play an important role in solving the entire analysis task. Unfortunately,
without certain facilitating tools or guidelines, it is often difficult and confusing to utilize these results to acquire
a comprehensive understanding of the problem domain.
We present our visual analytics framework that provides such facilitation to analysts by integrating multiple
heterogeneous processes. In our framework, we focus on collecting and sharing results from different analysis
processes rather than directly managing the low-level datasets. Since each process is incorporated with domain
viewpoints and knowledge, they provide the user with semantic representation of specific datasets. Our framework
dynamically collects and utilizes the results generated by these processes and represent them to the user in an
interactive manner such that an analysts can piece them into a coherent comprehensive view, as shown in Figure
??.
Visualization in our framework plays a key role as an intuitive integration interface that represents and
manages different analysis processes. Giving its power of providing visually representing of the abstracted
information?,? visualization not only provides a graphical interface to switch and invoke individual process, but
it also bridges and communicates to different process to retain a continuous analysis context. Analysts now could
have comprehensive understanding of their analysis task and come up with accurate solutions.
Using the visualization as an integration point also enables the analysts to interactively switch between
individual processes. In our framework, since each process is coordinated with others through the visual interface,
analysts could easily select and change to other process. This not only enables the effective analysis of different
datasets, but also reduce the confusion caused by switching context.
On a design level, our visual analytics framework allows all integrated processes to be built independently.
Since individual domain experts and engineers could follow their own guidelines, our framework could significantly
increase their design efficiency and provide an intuitive way to sharing analysis results.
Structured as a graph, our framework currently adopts standard communication packages to enable the
information sharing between individual processes. The main visual management interface is the root node that
collects and manages those communication packages, while individual processes are the child nodes that connect
to the interface. The complexities of these communication packages vary for different analysis tasks. For example,
it could contain certain predefined features that all the individual process would have, like terrorist group names,?
bridge number or DNA sequence IDs.? In addition to these lead features, the packages could also include detail
parameters that further provide more specific information. By sharing this information among different processes
and allowing them to perform individual analysis, our framework eventually creates a comprehensive decision
making and reasoning environment.
Since not all of the analysis process depends on others, our framework implements a flexible mechanism
to passing communication packages between the processes. Each process is authorized with the choice to be
synchronized or unsynchronized to the changes from other processes. This enables analyst to examine certain
information in a specific context without the disturbance from the other irrelevant information. In this way, a
bridge engineer could focus on examining the cracks on some pavements, without the need to deal with updated
results for the main bridge structures.?
With all the integrated processes, our framework provides user a comprehensive visual analytics environment
to facilitate the reasoning tasks.
5. APPLICATION
There are lots of fields that have such complex data integration and analysis problems, like the counter-terrorism
action in DHS or the infrastructure management in Department of Transportation. We had a great opportunity
to collaborate with North Carolina Department of Transportation to design an integrated system for maintain-
ing bridge infrastructure. Since the bridge maintenance requires deep understanding of various data sources,
appropriate bridge analysis becomes a complex data integration and analysis problem that is well-suited for our
framework. For example, the data sources need to be reviewed include bridge inspection imageries, the LIDAR
scan data, the sensor data, and etc. Although there are tools to examine most of this data, it is quite challenging
for the bridge engineers to comprehensively understand them all and make accurate maintenance decisions, as
shown in Figure ??.
5.1 System Design
Following the aforementioned in the framework, we designed a visual analytics system that could integrate
those specialize bridge analysis programs together. Our system not only could help bridge engineers to collect
information from different analysis results but it also facilitate their decision making tasks. In our system, we
have three major components, the interactive visual analytics interface, the ontological knowledge structure and
Figure 4. System Overview: (A) The Visualizations includes several highly interactive visual representations for depicting
information from different data aspects. (B) The Ontological Knowledge provides the guidelines for corresponding bridge
inspections domain information (C) Analysis tools, including image analysis tool for analyzing pavement, LIDAR analysis
tool for inspecting bridge structure and Remote sensing tools for examining overall conditions. (D) The communication
packages that is shared among these integrated components.
the peripheral analysis tools. Each component representing a set of processes and it is designed by individual
engineers and collaborators for this project.
While the visual analytics interface serves as an integration of other components in this system, as shown in
Figure ??, it also provides a highly interactive data exploration environment. The ontological knowledge structure
preserves and provides corresponding bridge inspections domain information. Lastly, the set of peripheral analysis
tools includes a LIDAR analysis tool and a pavement analysis tool provide specific domain results for different
bridge components. With all these components together, our system could provide comprehensive understandings
about those bridges.
Since in our system the main featured objects are clearly the bridges and its components, the communication
package are designed around depicting these features. More specifically, the package is consisted of Bridge Name,
Bridge Component Name and Component Specific Parameters. These packages contain most aspects of those
objects and the communications between each component are clear and feasible. Utilizing the most relevant
package information, each integrated component performs it specified analysis and interactively share the results
with the other components and the user.
As an integration and management of different processes, the visualization interface assists the user to depict
different analysis results and invokes certain process during their data exploration. The visualization component
adopts a multiple-window approach to automatically coordinate all these processes in a manner that the change
in one process window will affect the other ones when the views are appropriately coordinated. This allows our
system to keep the analyst within their previous reasoning context and reduce the cognitive cost of switching to
different analysis results.
By communicating information between the different components, our system can now provide bridge engi-
neers not only the ability to freely explore their preparatory data, but also facilitate them with their decision-
making tasks.
6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose our framework to use a visual analytics interface as an integration of heterogeneous
processes, each of which can analyze a specific type of data. Using this framework, we can reduce the problems
introduced by traditional data mining techniques and support comprehensive analysis of the data. Under this
framework, stand-alone software solutions can focus on specific aspects of the problem based on domain-specific
techniques. Our framework serves as a visual management repository for all the information and knowledge
discovered by each individual process, and allows the user to interactively analyze in the processes in a cohesive
and comprehensive manner.
To demonstrate the feasible of our system, we collaborated with NCDOT to present an interactive visual
analytics system for conducting bridge inspections. In this project, multiple data sources have been utilized by
individual programs to reveal different bridge aspects, such as 2D imagery, 3D LiDAR, and multi-dimensional
data based on bridge reports. The visual analytics interface automatically coordinates different programs and
share communication packages between them to provide the user a complete analysis of the data.
In theory, this framework is still at a preliminary stage; there are lots of details that could be improved. For
example, how much communication is necessary for two processes to fully share their analysis processes? And
can the processes be aggregated or integrated into higher level analytical tasks? We also need further investigate
the different relationships between task and processes, and identify more comprehensive principles for furthering
this visual analytics research.
In practical, although the application we presented to NCDOT has received positive feedback, we are still a
few steps away from real deployment for bridge engineers to use in their everyday life. Further investigations in
this framework are necessary to understand the limitations of this framework, and how we could overcome them
from both the theoretical as well as the practical perspectives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is supported by grant number DTOS59-07-H-0005 from the United States Department of Trans-
portation (USDOT), Research and Innovative Technology Administration (RITA). The views, opinions, findings
and conclusions reflected in this presentation or publication are the responsibility of the authors or presenters
only and do not represent the official policy or position of the USDOT, RITA, or any State or other entity.
The authors also would like to acknowledge the guidance and contributions of Mr. Caesar Singh, the Program
Manager at USDOT; and the technical assistance of Dr. Moy Biswas of the North Carolina DOT (NCDOT),
Mr. Garland Haywoord of NCDOT Division 10, and Mr. Jimmy Rhyne of Charlotte DOT.

