GPS and Road Map Navigation: The Case for a Spatial 
Framework for Semantic Information 
ABSTRACT 
Urban environments require cognitive abilities focused on both 
spatial overview and detailed understanding of uses and places. 
These abilities are distinct but overlap and reinforce each other. 
Our work quantitatively and qualitatively measures the effects on 
a user’s overall understanding of the environment after navigating 
with either a GPS or a road map in a previously unknown 
neighborhood. Experimental recall of spatial and semantic 
information indicates that using a road map enables subjects to 
demonstrate a significantly better spatial understanding, identify 
semantic elements more often using common terms, place 
semantic elements in spatial locations with greater accuracy and 
recall semantic elements in tighter clusters than when using a 
GPS. We conclude that a spatial understanding is a necessary 
framework for organizing semantic information that is useful for 
inferred tasks. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.2 [Information Systems] – Information interfaces and 
presentation (e.g. HCI) – Users Interfaces – Evaluation and 
Methodology. 
Keywords 
Navigation, Semantic information, Spatial information. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Computer interfaces often must present different kinds of complex 
information in meaningful ways; that is, in ways that fit the 
inherent structure of a setting.  Urban visualization is a 
particularly difficult setting involving enormous quantities of 
heterogeneous spatial and semantic information. Any city is 
described by hundreds of maps with overlapping scope and detail, 
as well as by dense lists of building uses, names, zip codes, 
political jurisdictions, road intersections, zoning types, flood plain 
information, etc.  Current interfaces suffer from a lack of 
integration of these spatial and semantic forms of knowledge. 
There has been some recent work in the computer-human 
interaction community focusing on GPS interfaces. Driving 
simulators have been used for some studies, but they can 
artificially simplify real world settings [3,20]. On the other hand,    
 
 
 
 
 
 
real world studies have been largely anecdotal [9,14,16]. This 
paper reports the findings of a real world experiment combined 
with quantitative measures of subject recall. 
The goal of this article is to examine how spatial and semantic 
information about an urban environment are acquired, coded, 
stored, recalled, and decoded, while also defining how these 
processes are inter-related. To better understand these cognitive 
processes, we use the concepts of cognitive maps and semantic 
networks that provide parallel information about the environment. 
We then test the ability to form a spatial understanding and how 
this can influence the ability to organize semantic information. 
Specifically, we utilize two common forms of navigation (GPS 
and road map) as instruments to explore a neighborhood. Through 
this study, we examine if the use of a GPS diminishes one’s 
spatial awareness of an urban environment, and if so, in what 
manner and to what extent the understanding is affected.  
Urban legibility is an important contemporary issue for the 
discipline of urban design. Historically, the physical form of the 
urban environment represented not just a collection of buildings, 
but also a concrete cosmology of the world, implying a stable 
meaning to the overall structure of the city.  For instance, one 
could count on the center of a city as the physical setting for the 
city hall or the cathedral. Today urban designers are confronted by 
urban environments with overlapping systems of movement and 
information that have made the reading of geometry insufficient 
for an understanding of the city. The ongoing discourse about the 
role of the physical setting amid the proliferation of mobility and 
information underlies our approach to this work. 
Furthermore, we propose to study the legibility of the urban 
environment based upon two forms of knowledge, spatial and 
semantic. There is considerable evidence from cognitive 
neuroscience that people process sensory information along two 
distinct, parallel pathways: a “where” pathway, concerned with 
spatial and functional information about the environment, and a 
“what” pathway, focusing on object recognition and semantic 
knowledge [1,8,15,26].  In the case of a person attempting to 
navigate an urban environment, we propose that the stream of 
“where” information forms a cognitive map of their surroundings 
while the “what” pathway collects semantic information in a 
network structure. Therefore, our investigation is based on the 
premise that spatial understanding can be studied though cognitive 
maps and semantic understanding can be studied though semantic 
networks. 
Cognitive maps are simultaneous and pattern-based mental 
representations of a place. Sketch mapping is one method used to 
externalize cognitive maps that is often represented in literature  
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
AVI ’10, May 25–29, 2010, Rome, Italy. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 978-1-4503-0076-6/10/2010…$10.00. 
 
Ginette Wessel 
University of  
California-Berkeley 
gwessel@berkeley.edu 
 
 
Caroline Ziemkiewicz 
University of North 
Carolina-Charlotte 
caziemki@uncc.edu 
 
 
Remco Chang 
University of North 
Carolina-Charlotte 
rchang@uncc.edu 
 
 
Eric Sauda 
University of North 
Carolina-Charlotte 
ejsauda@uncc.edu 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Routes each participant traveled through the urban 
environment. Route A (left). Route B (right). 
from users in either familiar or new situations [2,3,18]. They are 
distinguished from precise geographic maps as being less 
scientifically absolute  (and therefore more subjective), and as a 
means to simplify the idiosyncratic graphic features more or less 
in accordance with the tenets of perceptual psychology to reduce 
cognitive load.  
A semantic network is linear, sequential and verbal. It is 
represented in literature by elements that are related categorically 
and hierarchically [11,12,19]. Categories of semantic information 
can be preset and communal, but can also arise from individual or 
group understandings of the environment. Just like the 
development of a cognitive map, one’s categories of semantic 
information serve to reduce complexity and cognitive load.  
The devices used in this study, a GPS and a road map, present 
both spatial and semantic information to users. A road map has 
lines, colors, and patterns, but also names of roads, areas and 
landmarks. A GPS delivers step-by-step direction to a destination 
as well as a graphic representation of the space of the urban 
environment. While it is apparent each method uses different 
techniques to convey an urban understanding, both require 
processing by the user, and the nature and difficulty of that 
processing is the focus of this study.  
Our work quantitatively and qualitatively measures the effects on 
a user’s overall understanding of the environment after navigating 
with either a GPS or a road map in a previously unknown 
neighborhood. Later revealed to be a half truth, we began by 
hypothesizing that a road map is more effective in assisting the 
formation of the spatial information, whereas a GPS is more 
useful for understanding the semantic aspects of the environment.  
To investigate our hypothesis, we designed a within-subject 
experiment involving 18 participants who drove routes in the 
university area of Charlotte, NC. Each participant was randomly 
given two preselected routes and was instructed to use either a 
GPS or a road map for each route (Figure 1). Upon completion of 
each navigation session, participants were asked to complete a 
series of recall questions. Based on the results of our study, we 
conclude that a road map is indeed superior to a GPS in assisting 
in the formation of a spatial cognitive map. However, in gaining 
semantic information of an environment we find a GPS and a road 
map to be equally effective, but in different ways: a GPS tends to 
provide a diverse understanding of semantic elements whereas 
road maps provide a more structured and focused understanding.  
2. RELATED WORK 
Relevant literature to our work covers many research fields. 
Therefore, we parse this discussion into three areas: cognitive 
mapping and spatial understanding, semantic information and 
navigation studies. 
2.1 Cognitive Mapping and Spatial 
Understanding 
The term cognitive map was first used by psychologist Edward 
Tolman in Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men [23]. He describes a 
maze previously mastered by rats that is blocked at a critical point 
and replaced by a series of radically arranged alternatives. His 
finding is that the rats greatly prefer the route that demonstrates an 
understanding of the spatial overview of the maze. Partly a 
reaction against strict behaviorism, his work leads directly to the 
development of cognitive psychology.   
Kevin Lynch’s book Image of the City develops the idea of a 
mental map from the viewpoint of urban theory [18]. Based on 
empirical studies of sketch maps by residents of Boston, Jersey 
City, and Los Angeles, Lynch develops a set of categories, 
including paths, edges, nodes, districts and landmarks, that are 
used in understanding and wayfinding through these urban 
environments. Lynch’s work has been seminal not just within 
urban studies, but also in a wide variety of fields as an example of 
an underlying cognitive process.  
Chown discusses error tolerance and generalization in cognitive 
maps. He contends that human cognitive maps are not precise, 
complete, nor necessarily accurate [6]. These inherent 
inaccuracies of internal mental representations are hard to 
understand primarily due to the importance of navigation as an 
everyday activity. Regardless, information stored in cognitive 
maps is usually sufficient for human needs. Chown’s work 
realizes the difficulties that lie in quantitative analysis of cognitive 
maps but makes light of research in need of further investigation. 
Studies show that when elements are located relative to one 
another they are remembered as more aligned relative to a 
reference frame than they actually are. For example, a majority of 
subjects preferred maps in which North America and Europe 
appear in greater east-west alignment. Findings suggested people 
distort mental representations of the environment based on the 
north-south east-west axes of the world as a process of 
simplification to reduce the cognitive workload [21, 25].   
Cognitive mapping and how humans understand the environment 
spatially are well-studied topics that provide this analysis with a 
rich background of the ways humans recall, store, and code 
information in relation to the geographic environment. Tolman’s 
introduction of spatial overviews, claims significance in this 
investigation by explaining our participants’ ability to recall the 
environment in a spatial snapshot.  We relate to Lynch’s work not 
only by how humans perceive the environment through simplified 
cognitive elements, but also how these elements have some 
resemblance to those recalled by our participants.  Spatial 
distortions and inaccuracies are also noted to explain the 
discrepancies humans have in judging spatial locations. We find 
this to provide reasoning for how our participants were unable to 
recall elements in their correct geographic locations. 
2.2 Semantic Information 
A few investigations have studied the environment in not only a 
spatial manner, but also using semantic information [11,12,19]. 
Semantic information, in this discussion, refers to a specific type 
of knowledge representation where objects or elements (in our 
case, in the environment) have some implied relationship with one 
another. This type of knowledge representation develops when the 
brain organizes information. For many, this involves associating 
elements as clusters or hierarchical structures.  
One experiment that shows evidence of semantic clustering is that 
of Hirtle and Mascolo [12]. By using a sorting task based on 
names of selected landmarks, they found participants commonly 
grouped landmarks in a government cluster (court house, town 
hall, police station, post office, bank) and a recreation cluster 
(playground, pool, golf course, dock, beach).   
Similarly, Hirtle and Jonides [11] found that people cluster 
landmarks based on nonspatial attributes. Subjects in the study 
completed a memorization task on city landmarks in Ann Arbor. 
By noting the order in which landmarks were recalled, the authors 
developed a hierarchical tree for each subject. In each case, they 
found that subjects showed clustering bias, rating within-cluster 
pairs as closer together than equally distant between-cluster pairs. 
Work conducted by Mohan and Kashyap [19] exposes the 
semantic information in a hierarchical schema they refer to as the 
relational model. This model is able to show semantic information 
as one-to-many relationships (resulting in tree structures) as well 
as many-to-many relationships (resulting in lattice and network 
structures). Through a process of sub-classing, they classify 
objects such as country, state, county, and city into a hierarchy. 
Although an urban environment contains an abundance of 
semantic information, these studies prove humans carry a form of 
structured knowledge when relating urban elements to one 
another. We find these works beneficial for their methods of 
extracting knowledge organizations (semantic hierarchies and 
semantic categories) from cognitive processes. 
2.3 Navigation Studies 
Burnett and Lee conducted a navigation study to analyze a 
person’s ability to build cognitive maps [3]. Using a driving 
simulator, they studied a person’s memory when using a paper 
map or voice-automated direction guidance. As one method of 
analysis, they used scene recognition, where participants placed 
scenes from the route in sequential order. Second, they used a 
categorization scheme proposed by Appleyard [2] to evaluate 
sketch maps based on their complexity. Their findings indicated 
those who use voice-automated guidance have worse memory of 
the area than those who use a traditional printed map. While this 
may prove there are differences in recall using various 
navigational methods, there is some subjectivity in this 
categorization process. In addition, this study does not utilize a 
real life navigation environment. One can assume that 
irregularities in the natural geographic environment contribute to 
our cognitive map development and are important to our real life 
perception of space.  
Recent work at the University of Tokyo [13] investigated the 
effectiveness of a GPS device in comparison to a paper map or 
direct experience when walking urban routes. Among many 
things, their study showed GPS users travel more slowly, make 
larger direction errors, and draw poorer topological sketch maps 
than those who used a map or direct experience. As a result, they 
conclude that a GPS is ineffective for navigation as compared to 
other methods. While some of these findings are similar to ours, 
we note a significant difference in our performance measures; 
perhaps a result of navigation on foot versus in-car.  
Studies often use comparative navigation tasks as a way to 
understand cognitive processes performed during wayfinding. 
Furthermore, experts can apply quantitative measures to the recall 
of elements to define map building abilities and user efficiency.  
3. USER EXPERIMENT 
This experiment focuses on mental representations of the 
environment, specifically spatial and semantic information 
acquired during car navigation. While recent studies focus on 
usability of navigational aids [9,13,14,16], our study aims to 
uncover differences in the information a person stores using two 
common instruments: a conventional road map and a GPS.  
3.1 Participants 
Twenty college students (10 men and 10 women) participated in 
the experiment. Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 45. To 
ensure the results were consistent, it was important that the 
participants had no prior knowledge of the environment during 
navigation. Therefore, two of twenty participants said they were 
familiar with the routes and were eliminated from the experiment.  
3.2 Study Areas and Routes 
Each participant was observed while navigating two routes, one 
with a road map and one with a GPS. Route A and Route B 
(Figure 1) were similar in geographic surroundings, each 
approximately six miles in entire length, and had the same number 
of turns. Both routes consisted of three segments that the driver 
navigated one after another. Once the drivers finished the first 
segment, they started the second segment from the ending point of 
the first segment. The third segment lead the driver back to the 
starting point of the first segment. Participants were informed of 
the route to follow by a highlighted area on the road map or by a 
pre-programmed destination in the GPS. The order of which 
navigation method to use and which route to navigate were 
determined at random.  
3.3 Environmental Factors 
To control for environmental variables, traffic flow and weather 
conditions were taken into consideration. Participants were asked 
to navigate during low traffic periods of the day, reducing the 
possibility of heavy traffic conditions. To ensure that the 
participant had clear visibility, weather conditions were monitored 
to eliminate the possibility of precipitation. 
3.4 GPS Navigation 
All participants used the same GPS (Garmin Nuvi 760) mounted 
in the test vehicle. The system provided the user with a three-
dimensional first-person view that dynamically updated as the 
user moved through space. In addition, the GPS provided voice 
automated directions to assist the user when navigating. 
Participants were given no time to review the route before 
navigation, although they were given time to ask questions about 
how the device performed. All three destinations for each of the  
two routes were pre-programmed in the GPS. 
3.5 Road Map Navigation 
Each participant was given a traditional road map at the beginning 
of each navigation session (three maps per route, one per 
segment). Each map showed a highlighted route for participants to 
follow, clearly marked with the starting point and the final 
destination. Participants were given time to review their relative 
position and the location of the destination before navigation.  
3.6 Procedure 
Each participant was first asked to complete a pre-experiment 
questionnaire and the Santa Barbara Sense of Direction Scale [10] 
to provide data about their prior experience of navigating a 
vehicle using various methods (road map, GPS device, written 
directions). The participant was then reviewed by the investigator 
to have met all inclusionary criteria (valid drivers license, no prior 
route knowledge) for the study.  
After completion of the pre-experiment questionnaire, the 
participant was asked to navigate one of the two routes (all three 
segments). The participant was guided to the starting point and 
informed of which method (GPS or road map) to use and when to 
begin. During navigation, the investigator recorded field 
observations (length of time to navigate, number of turn mistakes 
made). Upon arriving at the final destination, the participant was 
guided by the investigator to a controlled room and asked to 
answer a post-experiment questionnaire (section 3.7) based on 
recall questions pertaining to the route. Participants were not 
given a time limit to complete the questions; on average it took 
each participant 35 minutes. After the participant completed the 
questions, they were asked to complete the other route using the 
other navigational aid. Upon arrival at the final destination they 
were again guided to the study room and asked the same series of 
questions in the post-experiment questionnaire. 
3.7 Post Experiment Questionnaire 
The post-experiment questionnaire consisted of a series of recall 
exercises including a sketch map, element recall and grouping, 
written direction recall, and scene recognition. Each participant 
was informed they could use as much time as needed to complete 
the questions. The sequence of the questionnaire was designed 
such that participants were not likely to form a bias from one 
question to the next. We discuss the questions in specific areas: 
spatial information, semantic information, spatial and semantic 
information combined, and scene recognition.  
3.7.1 Spatial Information 
We first asked participants to draw a sketch map of the trip they 
navigated, including all elements they were able to remember 
(Figure 2). Once this was complete, they were given another set of 
questions relating to their map. With the initial sketch map drawn 
by the participant in hand, they were asked to specify locations 
where they remembered taking a turn, the length of each segment, 
and how much time it took to complete each segment. The next 
investigation was that of written directions. We asked participants 
to write down the route they just navigated as though they were 
giving someone a set of step-by-step directions.  
3.7.2 Semantic Information 
This section covers element recall and element groupings similar 
to methods performed by Hirtle and Mascolo [12]. Participants 
were first asked to list as many things as they could remember 
from the trip on index cards (one card per item remembered). 
They were also informed that this exercise could cover a broad 
range of items (small or large). Following this element recall, 
participants were asked to group the elements (index cards) by 
how they believed the elements could be related to each other. 
3.7.3 Spatial and Semantic Information Combined 
Using the aforementioned index cards, we again asked 
participants to group the elements (index cards) but this time by 
where they thought the elements were located spatially. In 
addition, participants were asked to place each element listed on 
the index cards onto the sketch map they produced using a 
numbering method (Figure 5a). 
3.7.4 Scene Recognition 
Similar to methods proposed by Burnett and Lee [3], participants 
were shown a total of nine photographs taken along the route (two 
photographs were not actually along the route and served as 
dummy scenes). Of the nine photographs, they were asked how 
many of the scenes they recognized. Then participants were asked 
to place the scenes they recognized in the sequential order in 
which they were viewed when driving. 
 
Figure 2. Sketch map comparison across the two methods 
drawn by the same subject. Left is drawn after road map 
navigation and the right is drawn after GPS navigation. 
4. RESULTS 
The results of this experiment were evaluated on two major 
dimensions: accuracy in spatial recall and qualities of semantic 
recall. Our spatial analysis was primarily based on the sketch 
maps produced by participants, while our analysis of semantic 
memory was based largely on the index cards participants 
generated to describe objects and impressions they remembered 
from the route. Unless otherwise indicated, all statistical tests 
employed a two-tailed paired-response t-test to measure within-
subject differences.  Tests with a p value less than .05 were 
considered to be statistically significant.  
Of the 18 participants, nine were female and nine were male. 
Ages ranged from 18 to 45, with an average age of 23.44.  The 
number of years participants had lived in the city where the 
experiment took place ranged from zero to 33, with an average 
residence length of 4.31 years. Participants’ mean score on the 
Santa Barbara Sense of Direction scale was 3.45, which is below 
the scale’s reported mean of 4.7 [10]. 
There were no significant differences in any of the following 
measures based on gender.  There were also no significant 
correlations between these measures and age or length of 
residence.  The Santa Barbara Sense of Direction Scale did not 
positively correlate with any of our accuracy measures, although it 
showed a significant negative correlation with a participant’s 
ability to correctly place index cards (semantic elements). 
 
 
Figure 3. The difference in sketch map accuracy between the 
two conditions, showing the number of correct map elements 
(turns, road segments, and road names) for each participant.  
Only three cases show a participant produced a more correct 
sketch map in the GPS condition (orange, road map) (blue, 
GPS). 
Table 1. Participant’s sketch map accuracy measured by the 
number of correct, incorrect, and missing turns, road 
segments, road names, and the number of landmarks. The 
values were summed for overall measures of complexity (total 
elements), accuracy (correct elements), and errors (incorrect 
and missing elements). Based on a two-tailed paired-response 
t-test, participants made more complex and accurate sketch 
maps using a road map, and had fewer missing elements. 
 Road map GPS   
Dependant 
variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Total Elements 38.22 9.87 31.67 9.15 2.94 
 
0.002** 
Correct Elements 28.78 10.09 22.39 8.44 3.37 
 
0.004** 
Incorrect Elements 2.72 5.20 4.67 5.85 -1.1 0.288 
Missing Elements 9.67 9.88 16.17 8.49 
-
3.64 
 
0.002** 
** p < .01       
Table 2. Written narrative of route recall. There are no 
significant differences between the two groups, although in the 
road map condition a trend toward more correct road names 
and fewer missing turns approaches significance. 
 Road map GPS   
Dependant 
variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Correct road 
names 5.29 2.91 3.41 2.60 2.08 0.054 
Number of 
missing turns 4.41 3.73 7.24 2.91 -1.83 0.086 
4.1 Spatial Accuracy 
In general, the use of road maps was consistently found to be 
associated with superior spatial recall.  As we hypothesized, the 
sketch maps produced in the road map condition were 
significantly more correct and thorough than those produced in 
the GPS condition.  We calculated the accuracy of sketch maps by 
counting the number of turns, road segments, and road names that 
correctly corresponded to the actual route, as well as those that 
were incorrect or missing. These values were then summed to 
produce an overall number of correct, incorrect, and missing 
elements on each sketch map. Comparing these accuracy 
measures between the two conditions showed a strong advantage 
for the road maps (Figure 3). For instance, sketch maps produced 
in the road map condition contained more correct, more total and 
fewer missing turns, roads segments and road names (Table 1). 
There was no significant difference in the number of incorrect 
elements between the two conditions. These findings strongly 
suggest that, although GPS navigation tends to be faster and less 
prone to errors, there is a distinct advantage to road map usage in 
enhancing spatial memory of an urban environment.  
In reproducing a set of written directions, users in the road map 
condition tended to remember more road names correctly and had 
fewer missing turns, although both of these effects were shy of 
significance (Table 2). This suggests that the advantages of the 
road map do not apply nearly as strongly when users recall route 
information sequentially rather than spatially.  
4.2 Semantic Recall 
We measured semantic recall by analyzing the index cards 
participants produced that described objects and impressions 
along the route.  While neither method was clearly superior in this 
respect, the differences between the two suggest that GPS 
navigation leads to a broader but less clearly organized semantic 
memory, while the use of a road map leads to a more structured 
and focused semantic memory.   
Between the two methods, there was no clear difference in the 
number of index cards produced.  There was also no difference in 
the number of categories participants placed the cards in when 
asked to group them semantically or spatially.  
There was, however, a significant difference in the type of 
information recalled.  In order to study the amount of unique 
detail in participants’ semantic recall, we tallied the number of 
times each index card observation was repeated by any participant 
in either route and marked those observations that appeared ten or 
more times as being highly common.  This list included three 
frequently noted landmarks (the bookstore that served as the 
starting and ending point, the university, and the railroad tracks 
crossed on both routes) and five common generic observations 
(pedestrians, gas stations, churches, stoplights, and apartment 
complexes).  By removing these observations, we were able to 
calculate the percentage of index cards that reflected relatively 
more unique observations (Figure 4). This percentage was found 
to be significantly higher in the GPS condition than in the road 
map condition (Table 3) suggesting a greater breadth of semantic 
recall in GPS navigation.    
4.3 Semantic and Spatial Recall Combined 
We focused on two measures of how participants combined 
semantic and spatial information: the groupings of index cards by 
location, and the placement of index cards on the sketch map. As 
mentioned, there was no difference in the number of categories 
participants produced when asked to group their index cards by 
location. However, there were differences in how participants 
placed index cards on the sketch map they had drawn. By 
analyzing the accuracy of the index card placement we noticed 
participants in the road map case placed objects correctly 
significantly more often (Table 3), indicating a better sense of the 
location of semantic elements in the road map condition.   
There were also broader differences in the way that participants 
placed the index cards on their sketch maps.  We analyzed these 
trends in placement by marking the positions of all cards placed 
on the sketch maps, normalizing the maps to a constant size of 
3200 by 2400 pixels, and clustering the index cards by location 
using an adaptive k-means clustering algorithm with a distance 
threshold of 500 pixels (Figure 5). This provided a quantitative 
overview of whether participants placed index cards evenly across 
the map, or concentrated them in a smaller number of locations.  
 
Figure 4. The total height of the bar shows the total number of 
index cards generated. The lighter-colored area of each bar 
shows the number of cards containing the most common 
observations.  This proportion tends to be much higher in the 
road map condition (orange). 
Table 3. Semantic recall: analysis of index cards noting 
objects and impressions. While there was no difference in the 
number of index cards produced, index cards in the road map 
condition were significantly more likely to contain one of the 
eight most common observations. The percentage of cards 
that contained a more unique observation was significantly 
higher in the GPS condition, suggesting a greater variety of 
semantic memory. Alternatively, placement of index cards on 
sketch map on the road map condition were more likely to 
accurately recall the position of these observations. 
 Road map GPS   
Dependant 
variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Number of 
index cards 10.50 6.10 9.56 4.06 0.57 0.578 
Common 
index cards 3.28 2.29 1.83 1.10 2.78 0.013* 
Unique index 
card % 65.99% 21.45% 78.51% 16.53% -2.25 0.038* 
Total placed 
cards 9.89 6.55 8.17 4.56 1.06 0.303 
Correct 
placement % 93.77% 11.87% 84.61% 17.22% 2.15 0.047* 
* p < .05       
 
 
Figure 5. The process of clustering index cards on sketch 
maps for analysis of placement. This sketch map shows a 
participant using GPS navigation on Route A. Participants 
were asked to place the elements (listed on their index cards) 
onto the sketch map they drew. The cards were labeled with 
numbers by the observer (a). Each map scaled to 3200 by 2400 
pixels for a more standardized comparison. Each index card 
was recorded as a point (b). Adaptive k-means clustering to 
place each point into a cluster on its position, using a 
threshold of 500 pixels (c). Points of the same color were 
clustered together, and X marks the centroid of each cluster.      
Table 4. Differences in the placement of index cards on the 
sketch map by clustering the points by distance. Participants 
in the road map case tend to have slightly more clusters than 
in the GPS condition, although this effect does not reach 
significance. However, clusters of index cards in the GPS case 
tend to be much sparser, as indicated by the greater average 
distance between individual cards and the center of the cluster 
to which they belong. This suggests that index cards in the 
GPS case are placed in a less organized fashion than the more 
structured (and correct) placement in the road map condition. 
 Road map GPS   
Dependant 
variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Number of 
clusters 4.94 1.39 4.00 1.33 -1.77 0.094 
Points per 
cluster 2.39 0.79 2.78 1.18 1.29 0.216 
Avg. distance 
to cluster 
center 182.78 38.50 227.94 62.36 -3.175 0.006** 
** p < .01       
Table 5. Unlike Burnett and Lee’s [3] virtual environment, the 
table shows no difference between GPS and road map 
navigation in scene recall. Failing to replicate this finding 
suggests the effect may not extend to a real-world urban 
environment. 
 Road map GPS   
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Correct scenes 6.00 1.06 5.82 0.95 0.72 0.484 
Correctly ordered 
scenes 3.76 1.55 3.82 1.71 -0.10 0.918 
There was a slight trend towards participants producing more 
clusters of index cards in the road map condition, although this 
difference did not reach significance (Table 4). However, index 
cards in the GPS condition had a significantly higher average 
distance from the cluster’s center, suggesting more spread-out 
placement (Figure 6).  
Taken together, these findings suggest a scattershot memory for 
the spatial locations of semantic observations after using a GPS 
for navigation.  Road map users seem to hold a more robust 
connection between semantic and spatial information, while the 
scattered placement of index cards in the GPS case suggests less 
structured recall.   
4.4 Scene Recognition 
Unlike Burnett and Lee [3], we found no significant difference 
between the two conditions in terms of recognized scene images 
or scene ordering (Table 5). However in the road map condition 
there was a significant negative correlation between the number of 
correct elements in the sketch map and the number of correctly 
recognized scenes (R(16) = -0.48, p = 0.04). No such relationship 
existed in the GPS condition.  A possible explanation for this 
finding is that participants who successfully fit route information 
to a top-down spatial structure may have been less adept at 
adopting a first-person view when recalling the route.  
While our test of scene recognition reflects the study performed 
by Burnett and Lee, our results indicate a noteworthy difference 
between their study using a simulated driving test and our study 
using the real world environment.  Although there are many more 
factors to control in a navigation experiment in the real world than 
in a simulator, we argue that results from a real world experiment 
are particularly significant due to the complexity of the 
environment. Specifically, the images in the scene recognition 
portion of Burnett and Lee’s study show a virtual environment 
that is flat with few buildings and trees. It is therefore not 
(a)                                 (b)                               (c) 
surprising that it is easier for their participants to recognize 
images and scenes in this simplified environment. In our 
experiment, the participants are driving through an urban 
environment that is lively and complex, and therefore more 
difficult for the participants to remember accurately.  
Our results overall show a clear advantage for road maps over 
GPS for recalling purely spatial information after a navigation 
task although, the recollection of semantic knowledge shows a 
less straightforward pattern between the two methods. While 
neither method has a clear advantage in semantic recall, there is 
evidence that road maps encourage recollection that is more 
accurately linked to spatial positions, while a GPS is associated 
with a broader range of semantic observations.    
 
Figure 6. The same participant produced very different index 
card layouts in the road map and the GPS conditions. In the 
GPS case, index cards are scattered across the sketch map, 
while they are tightly clustered in the road map condition.  
5. DISCUSSION 
Our quantitative analysis provides a basis for understanding the 
relationships between spatial and semantic understandings of an 
urban environment. Our findings reflect similar studies in 
cognitive and neuroscience literature in that we have clearly found 
a dissociation between semantic and spatial recall in the context of 
understanding and recalling an urban environment, analogous to 
the distinction between “what” and “where” knowledge in 
neuroscience.   
The focus of our study is not on the performance of GPS and road 
map users during navigation tasks, but rather on the structuring of 
semantic and spatial information. While the concept is not new, 
there has been limited evidence on how the two pathways relate to 
one another in understanding urban environments. In our study, 
we focus on using two methods to directly combine spatial and 
semantic information by asking the participants to group semantic 
elements (index cards) spatially, and then place the semantic 
elements onto a spatial representation (sketch map).  
We believe that a wider understanding of the urban environment 
is more adaptive and useful than focusing only on one narrow 
task; we are less concerned with route than with survey 
knowledge [7,17,22], or to put it more precisely, we are concerned 
with the way in which survey knowledge emerges from 
navigating routes.  
GPS and road maps each present users with both spatial and 
semantic information, but there are significant differences in the 
manner in which users process this information. Specifically, our 
study confirms that:  
1. using a road map allows users to demonstrate a significantly 
better spatial understanding than using a GPS, 
2. using a road map allows users to identify semantic elements 
significantly more often using common terms compared to 
using a GPS,  
3. using a road map allows users to be significantly better at 
correctly placing semantic elements in spatial locations than 
using a GPS, and  
4. using a road map causes users to concentrate semantic elements 
in tighter clusters than using a GPS.  
The first finding shows that road map users have a better spatial 
understanding of the study area, as measured by an evaluation of 
the sketch maps, for both correct and incorrect elements. Despite 
the fact that users are presented with spatial information in both a 
road map and a GPS, this finding implies that using a road map 
tends to allow for the formation of a more accurate cognitive map. 
The next three findings all relate to semantic information. We find 
that road map users, who have a more fully formed cognitive map, 
tend to use a common set of semantic terms, place them more 
accurately and tend to more tightly cluster them in location. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that the spatial cognitive map may 
form a framework that structures the naming, arrangement and 
accuracy of semantic elements.  
We surmise that semantic elements tend to be difficult to organize 
relative to an understanding of urban environment, or indeed in 
any geographic scale. This is confirmed by studies of inaccuracies 
caused by semantic classification of spatial information. In a 
classic example, our semantic classification of north/south 
position on Europe and the United States leads us to assume 
incorrect locations [21,25]. 
Lastly, it is relevant to note that as a driving aid, a GPS is superior 
to a road map.  In this study, participants make more mistakes and 
wrong turns using a road map than a GPS.  Interestingly, when 
using a map, the more mistakes a participant makes, the more 
accurate his sketch map is. Presumably this is due to the fact that 
more cognitive effort is put into understanding the correct routes.  
The results from our study suggest that a better cognitive map 
(spatial understanding) gives a more solid foundation on which to 
place semantic elements. A failure to develop a spatial 
understanding might inhibit the ability to gain an overview that 
can structure semantic information. GPS devices may have the 
unintentional effect of making a route more accurate while at the 
same time making broader understanding more difficult. 
6. FUTURE WORK 
Our goal is to work toward the integration of spatial and semantic 
information in urban environments as an example of combining 
heterogeneous information in interface design that matches the 
cognitive abilities of users.  
First, we are observing the way in which cognitive maps are 
formed by studying groups of people who have recently become 
familiar with new cities. We are analyzing the sketch maps drawn 
by these participants to understand the principals by which the 
maps are drawn. Using the vectors from the maps, we plan to 
develop an algorithm that can automatically generate a 
(simplified) cognitive map from any complex geographic map.  
Although some work has been done with route simplification, the 
techniques for an overall spatial understanding are undeveloped.  
Second, we are seeking to extend and modify techniques 
developed by Chang et al. [4,5], which currently simplifies 
complex urban models by using principals of urban legibility to 
create hierarchical clusters of buildings. The current algorithm 
uses only spatial concepts, but we are studying methods to add 
semantic information about the urban model that will influence 
the order in which clusters of building are formed. This will allow 
a clustering of buildings based on a semantic category of interest, 
for example restaurants. The form of the urban model will then 
reflect the semantic information of the environment. 
7. CONCLUSION 
Technology is constantly changing the ways through which we 
understand and interact with our environments. In this article, we 
present an experiment comparing the use of a GPS and a road map 
to measure spatial and semantic recall of participants in order to 
investigate their understanding of an urban environment.  
GPS devices have proven to be very capable of providing accurate 
route information to the user. However, we conclude that using a 
road map leads to a better spatial understanding, and that this 
spatial understanding correlates with a semantic understanding 
that is more accurate and focused for the placement of elements.      
Our original hypothesis that a road map is more effective at the 
spatial information and a GPS is more effective at organizing 
semantic information was overly simplistic and missed the 
interaction of semantic and spatial understanding. Based on our 
study, we now see that these forms of cognition can compliment 
each other, and that spatial cognition constitutes a framework for 
a semantic understanding.  
The emergence of GPS devices may lead to better route 
information, but at the same time lead to degradation in the 
overview understanding recorded by cognitive maps.  There is a 
need for interfaces to include spatial overviews that allow for 
inferences about survey information, and that combine semantic 
and spatial information in an intuitive manner. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Aguirre, G.K. and D'Esposito, M. 1997. Environmental 
knowledge is subserved by separable dorsal/ventral neural 
areas. Journal of Neuroscience, 17(7), 2512-2518. 
[2] Appleyard, D.A. 1970. Styles and methods of structuring a 
city. Environment and Behavior, 2, 100-116. 
[3] Burnett, G.E. and Lee, K. 2005. The effect of vehicle 
navigation systems on the formation of cognitive maps. In 
Underwood, G (Ed.) Traffic and Transport Psychology: 
Theory and Application. Elsevier, 407-418. 
[4] Chang, R., Butkiewicz, T., Ziemkiewicz, C., Wartell, Z., 
Pollard, N., Ribarsky, W. 2006. Hierarchical Simplification 
of City Models to Maintain Urban Legibility. In SIGGRAPH 
2006: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Sketches. ACM Press, 130. 
[5] Chang, R., Wessel, G., Kosara, R., Sauda, E. and Ribarsky, 
W. 2007. Legible Cities: Focus Dependent Multi-resolution 
Visualization of Urban Relationships. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 
13(6), 1169-1175. 
[6] Chown, E. 1999. Error Tolerance and Generalization in 
Cognitive Maps: Performance without precision. In R.G. 
Golledge (Ed) Wayfinding Behavior: Cognitive Mapping and 
other Spatial Processes. London: John Hopkins University 
Press, 349-369. 
[7] Denis, M. 1996. Imagery and The Description of Spatial 
Configurations. In De Vega, M., Intons-Peterson, M.J., 
Johnson-Laird, P.M., Denis, M. and Maschark, M. (Eds) 
Models of Visuospatial Cognition. Oxford, New York, 128-
197. 
[8] Goodale, M.A. and Milner, A.D. 1992. Separate visual 
pathways for perception and action. Trends in Neuroscience, 
15(1), 20-25. 
[9] Graf, S., Spiessl, W., Schmidt, A., Winter, A. and Rigoll, G. 
2008. In-car interaction using search-based user interfaces. In 
Proceedings of CHI 2008, ACM Press,1685-1688. 
[10] Hegarty, M., Richardson, A.E., Montello, D., Lovelace, K., 
Subbiah I. 2002. Development of a self-report measure of 
environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30(5), 425-447. 
[11] Hirtle, S.C. and Jonides, J. 1985. Evidence of hierarchies in 
cognitive maps. Memory & Cognition, 13(3), 208-217. 
[12] Hirtle, S.C. and Mascolo, M.F. 1986. Effect of Semantic 
Clustering on the Memory of Spatial Locations. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 12(2), 182-189. 
[13] Ishikawa, T., Fujiwara, H., Osamu, I. and Okabe, A. 2008. 
Wayfinding with a GPS-based mobile navigation system: A 
comparison with maps and direct experience. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology, 28, 74-82. 
[14] Jonsson, I., Harris, H., and Nass, C. 2008. How accurate 
must In-Car Information System be? In Proceedings of CHI 
2008, ACM Press, 1665-1674. 
[15] Kaas, J.H. and Hackett, T.A. 2000. "What" and "where" 
processing in auditory cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2(12), 
1045-1047. 
[16] Leshed, G., Velden, T., Rieger, O., Kot, B. and Sengers, P. 
2008. In-Car GPS Navigation: Engagement with and 
Disengagement from the Environment. In Proceedings of 
CHI 2008, ACM Press, 1675-1684. 
[17] Lobben, A.K. 2004. Tasks, Strategies, and Cognitive 
Processes Associated With Navigational Map Reading: A 
Review Perspective. The Professional Geographer, 56(2), 
270-281. 
[18] Lynch, K. Image of the City. 1960. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, USA. 
[19] Mohan, L. and Kashyap, R.L. 1988. An Object-Oriented 
Knowledge Representation for Spatial Information. In IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, 14(5), 675-681. 
[20] Oliver, K.J. and Burnett, G.E. 2008. Learning-oriented 
Vehicle Navigation Systems: A Preliminary Investigation in 
a Driving Simulator. In Proceedings of ACM conference on 
Mobile Human-Computer Interaction, Amsterdam, 119-126. 
[21] Stevens, A. and Coupe, P. 1978. Distortion in Judged Spatial 
Relation. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 422-437. 
[22] Taylor, H.A. and Tversky, B. 1992. Spatial mental models 
derived from survey and route descriptions. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 31, 261-282. 
[23] Tolman, E.C. 1948. Cognitive Maps in Rats and Man, 
Psychological Review, 55, 189-208. 
[24] Tversky, B. 2005. How to get around by mind and body: 
Spatial thought, spatial action. In Zilhao, A. (Ed.) Cognition, 
evolution, and rationality: A cognitive science for the XXIst 
century. Routledge, London. 
[25] Tversky, B. 1981. Distortions in memory for maps. Cognitive 
Psychology, 13, 407-433. 
[26] Ungerleider, L. and J. Haxby. 1994. What and where in the 
human brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 4, 157-16.

