Visual Analytics for Requirements-driven Risk Assessment 
 
 
Robin A. Gandhi and Seok-Won Lee 
Dept. of Software and Information Systems, The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
Charlotte, NC 28223-0001, USA. {rgandhi, seoklee}@uncc.edu  
 
 
Abstract 
Risk assessment is a complex decision making 
process during Certification and Accreditation (C&A) 
activities. It requires to understand the multi-
dimensional correlations among numerous C&A 
requirements to reason about their collective and 
adequate behavior to minimize risks to a software 
system. Also, diverse stakeholders in the 
organizational hierarchy should be able to 
comprehend and utilize the risk assessment artifacts to 
agree upon an acceptable level of risks and justify the 
criticality and cost of mitigation strategies related to 
C&A requirements. We believe requirements 
visualization plays an important role in providing rich 
contextual information for understanding and 
analyzing risk assessment artifacts and present our 
initial experiences in using intuitive visual metaphors 
and their explanations for requirements-driven risk 
assessment [8] [11].   
1. Introduction 
Security certification establishes the extent to which 
a particular design and implementation meets a set of 
specified security requirements (usually referred to as 
baseline security controls) [4]. Standardized C&A 
requirements reflect organizational concerns for 
security risks most critical in their environment. 
Operational profiles [19] and use cases [6] are also 
necessary to assess security risks. Therefore, the 
organization’s confidence on its software systems to 
reliably support its critical businesses/missions is 
assured when these risks are demonstrated to be 
reduced to an acceptable level. To make such 
assessment, following certification, the goal of 
accreditation is to agree upon an “acceptable level of 
risk” for authorizing system operation as shown in 
Figure 1. However, given the complexity of current 
software systems and numerous C&A requirements, a 
thorough assessment of risks is very difficult. 
Infrastructure-wide standard security C&A 
requirements are tailored according to the unique 
socio-technical environment of an organization. 
However, C&A requirements are usually specified in 
ambiguous natural language descriptions and scattered 
across multiple regulatory documents that express 
diverse stakeholders’ viewpoints in the organizational 
hierarchy. As a result, a great deal of subjectivity is 
involved in understanding C&A requirements and 
assessing the impact of evidences gathered for their 
compliance on the emergent system behavior. These 
issues greatly undermine the ability of certification 
analysts to make objective decisions about acceptable 
levels of risks and making recommendations about 
authorizing system operation. In turn, system 
stakeholders often find it difficult to comprehend and 
utilize the risk assessment artifacts (usually thick 
reports with technical details) from C&A activities. 
APPROVAL TO
OPERATE
ACCREDITATION
GRANTED ?
DEVELOP
RECOMMENDATION
CERTIFY 
SYSTEM ?
YES
NO
ACCEPTABLE 
RISKS
EXTREMELY HIGH 
RISKS
ASSESS SYSTEM 
COMPLIANCE 
WITH BASELINE 
SECURITY 
REQUIREMENTS
DISAPPROVE
OPERATION
REPEAT 
CERTIFICATION 
ACTIVITIES
INTERIM
APPROVAL TO 
OPERATE
HIGH AND 
MODERATE 
RISKS BEING 
FIXED
 
Figure 1: Certification and Accreditation Activities 
To address these issues, we explore the possibilities 
of performing visual analytics [20] [17] within our 
integrated methodology for requirements-driven risk 
assessment [8] [11]. Specifically, we use requirements 
visualization techniques to illustrate the risks due to 
cascading effects of non-compliance with C&A 
requirements on system behavior. Different visual 
metaphors and explanations are intended to support 
certification analysts in effectively focusing on critical 
C&A requirements for assessing risks in a given 
operational scenario. Findings from our approach 
applied to a regulatory C&A process of The United 
States Department of Defense (DoD) are presented.  
2. Background  
2.1 Modeling C&A Requirements 
Guided by the Ontology-based ACTive 
Requirements Engineering (Onto-ActRE) framework 
[10], we harness the expressiveness of ontologies to 
classify and categorize C&A requirements from the 
following dimensions: 1) a requirements domain 
model of requirement types that hierarchically 
categorizes C&A requirements; 2) a viewpoints 
hierarchy that models different perspectives and 
related stakeholders of a C&A requirement; 3) a C&A 
process goal hierarchy with leaf-node scenarios to 
express process activities related to a C&A 
requirement; and 4) domain-specific taxonomies of 
risk components of assets, threats, vulnerabilities, and 
countermeasures related to C&A requirements. 
Currently, the Onto-ActRE framework has been 
applied to the Department of Defense Information 
Technology Security Certification and Accreditation 
Process (DITSCAP) [3] [4] to build a Problem Domain 
Ontology (PDO) by processing approximately 800 
pages of regulatory documents.  
As compared to ambiguous natural language 
specifications that are open to subjective interpretation, 
the semantics of each DITSCAP requirement is now 
established by visualizing its relationships with other 
domain concepts in the DITSCAP PDO. For example, 
Figure 2 visualizes the DITSCAP requirement of 
“Remote Access Audit Trails for Privileged Functions” 
[5] and its relationships in the DITSCAP PDO to 
precisely establish its semantics among stakeholders. 
The DITSCAP PDO includes 604 domain concepts 
that help to understand 533 C&A requirements. 
Further details can be found in [12] [15] [13]. 
 
Figure 2: Visualizing a C&A Requirement 
2.1.1 C&A Requirements & Risk Components 
To systematically identify and reason about the risk 
components expressed (or missing) in natural language 
C&A security requirements descriptions, we extend the 
Common Criteria security model [2]. The resulting 
model, as shown in Figure 3, explains the relationships 
between security requirements and risk components. 
 Based on the model in Figure 3, a domain expert 
identifies the relevant risk components and maps them 
to the concepts in the domain-specific taxonomies of 
threats, assets, vulnerabilities, and countermeasures 
modeled in the PDO. Processing a C&A requirement 
description involves various heuristics based on 
domain expertise, keyword analysis, regulatory 
document exploration, hierarchical browsing of 
concepts and navigating their relationships in the PDO. 
 
D
A
M
A
G
E
*
1..*
MISSION 
CRITICALITY
HAVE* 1
*
RISKS
INCREASE
L
E
A
D
 T
O
RE
DU
CE
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
1..*
*
*
HAVE
EXPLOIT
1..* *
HAVE
* *
MITIGATES
*1..*
THREATS
SECURITY
REQUIREMENTS
APPLY TO
*
1..*
SUGGEST
DR
IV
EN
 BY
P
R
E
V
E
N
T
1..*
1..*
*
1..*
*
*
VULNERABILITIES
COUNTER
MEASURES
ASSETS
 
Figure 3: Requirements and Risk Model [8] 
2.1.2 Evidences for Requirements Compliance 
For each C&A requirement, the PDO development 
involves the creation of structured “compliance 
questionnaires” by a domain expert who has many 
years of experience in the field of performing C&A. 
Each question has well-defined answer options that 
reflect the following ordered levels of compliance: 1) 
fully compliant; 2) partially compliant; 3) non-
compliant; and 4) no evidences, for ease and 
uniformity in interpretation.  
3. Visual Analytics for Risk Assessment 
Security risks in a complex system most often arise 
due to cascading effects of a failure (e.g. weakest link 
syndrome) among security constraints that collectively 
contribute to emergent secure software behavior. As a 
result, from a C&A perspective, discovering and 
understanding the multi-dimensional correlations 
among different classes of security constraints imposed 
in the operational context of a complex software 
system is necessary to uncover and assess all possible 
risks. To this end, requirements visualization will play 
an important role in providing additional context for 
risk assessment as a decision making process based on 
multi-dimensional analysis in the problem domain.  
We present a step-wise methodology in [8] for 
discovering and understanding the correlations among 
C&A requirements applicable in a given operational 
scenario of the target system to conduct risk 
assessment. While specific details of our methodology 
can be found in [8], here we briefly discuss the 
characteristics of the resulting visual risk assessment 
artifacts based on Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) [9]. 
Brief introduction to FCA can also be found in [8]. 
A formal context for conducting FCA is built from 
an Analysis Pool of C&A requirements. We define 
analysis pool as an exhaustive compilation of C&A 
requirements that collectively constrain target system 
behavior in diverse ways in a socio-technical 
environment for a given operational scenario. A 
stepwise process of selecting the C&A requirements to 
be included in an analysis pool; and then, their 
abstraction to requirement categories modeled in the 
PDO is required to build a formal context. The formal 
context is then represented as a cross table with one 
row for each C&A requirement category (formal 
object) and one column for each risk component 
(formal attribute) by having a cross in the intersection 
of row and column if the corresponding C&A 
requirement category and risk component are related in 
the PDO. The formal context is also augmented based 
on the “is-a” relationships among C&A requirements 
categories or risk components in the PDO.  
Within the formal context, a formal concept is 
defined as a pair of sets (A, B); where A is a set of 
C&A requirements categories called its extent 
(connections to reality); and B as a set of risk 
components called its intent (semantics). A formal 
concept (A, B) is a subconcept of a formal concept (C, 
D), if the extent A is a subset of the extent of C or if the 
intent of B is a superset of the intent of D. The partially 
ordered set of all formal concepts is always a complete 
lattice structure and is called a concept lattice. An 
example concept lattice for a hypothetical remote 
access target system operational scenario is shown in 
Figure 4 (Reproduced from [8]).  
The concept lattice provides a visual and concise 
representation of all potential correlations among C&A 
requirements categories in the given scenario, while 
facilitating their interpretation for risk assessment. The 
most general node that covers all risk components 
related to a requirement category is labeled with that 
requirement category. The most specific node that 
covers all requirement categories related to a risk 
component is labeled with that risk component. For a 
node in the lattice, the extent of the corresponding 
formal concept includes all the requirements categories 
that are reachable in the lattice navigating downward 
from the node (including the selected node). The intent 
of the formal concept includes all the risk components 
that are reachable in the lattice navigating upward from 
the node (including the selected node).  
3.1 Formal Concept Explanations 
For ease of understanding the formal concepts in a 
lattice, their natural language explanations are 
automatically generated by interpreting their intent, 
extent, and their relationships based on the 
requirements and risk model in Figure 3. Example 
explanation of the node “C15” is shown in Figure 4. 
The explanations “restore” the meaning of 
relationships between requirements and risk 
components, which were previously recorded only as 
“crosses” in a formal context cross table, based on the 
domain semantics of the PDO (model of Figure 3).  
3.2 Visualizing the Problem Context 
The concept lattice provides several metrics for risk 
assessment [8]; however, computing them requires 
keen visual inspection of the lattice structure. The 
lattice also lacks information about the requirements 
compliance levels in the context of the target system. 
Therefore, to augment the analytical capabilities of the 
concept lattice for risk assessment, we have developed 
Figure 4: An Example Concept Lattice for Remote Access Operational Scenario of the Target System [8]  
visual metaphors that can illustrate critical 
requirements and the potential risks due to cascading 
effects of their non-compliance on overall system 
behavior. Visual features of the metaphors convey 
metrics derived from the concept lattice [8], metrics 
gathered from requirements compliance questionnaires 
(section 2.1.2), and semantics derived from the PDO 
(the understanding of C&A requirements and related 
risk components, e.g. Figure 2).  
3.2.1 Visual Metaphor: Cohesive Bar Graph. A 
formal concept, in our approach, generates cohesion 
among requirements in its extent based on shared risk 
components among them in its intent. Therefore, we 
visualize a formal concept based on the “cohesive bar 
graph” visual metaphor as shown in Figure 5. Each bar 
in the graph represents a formal object (requirement 
category) in the formal context.  
 
Figure 5: Visual Metaphor: Cohesive Bar Graph  
Visual features of a bar represent several quantitative 
and qualitative metrics for a requirement category:   
? The color of a bar: It represents the compliance 
level of the corresponding requirement category in the 
context of the target system (section 2.1.2). “Green” 
represents full compliance, “Yellow” represents partial 
compliance, “Red” represents non-compliance, and 
“White” indicates absence of evidences. A “Black” bar 
represents that the corresponding requirements 
category is not in the extent of the selected node.  
? The height of a bar: It represents the requirement 
category correlation index [8]. In the range of [0, 1], it 
is a ratio of the number of formal concepts that cover 
the requirement category in their extent, and the total 
number of formal concepts. Larger the ratio, higher is 
the potential for correlation of a requirement category 
with other requirements categories due to shared risk 
components in the given scenario. 
? The width of a bar: It represents the ratio of the 
number of risk components related to a requirement 
category in the formal context, and the total number of 
risk components in the formal context. Larger the 
width of a bar for a requirement category, higher is its 
coverage of risk components in the given scenario.  
? The ordering of bars: It is based on height and then 
based on width (for bars with the same height). The 
ordering and the color of the bars now help to readily 
prioritize requirement categories for their influence on 
the risk components in the intent of the formal concept 
based on their potential to correlate with other 
requirements, coverage of risk components, and their 
level of compliance in the given scenario.  
3.2.2 Impact Analysis using Cohesive Bar Graph. 
The goal of impact analysis is to identify a set of 
requirements categories, in addition to the known non-
compliant requirements categories, whose compliance 
will be potentially undermined and then to reveal all 
the corresponding potential risks in the scenario. 
Adopting the techniques in [18], such analysis can be 
visually conducted as follows: 1) Identify the most 
specific formal concept in the concept lattice, that 
contains all the non-compliant requirement categories 
in its extent; and then 2) For the identified formal 
concept, all its super-concepts (and the requirement 
categories in their extent) in the lattice are investigated 
for potential propagative effects of non-compliance.   
 
Figure 6: Non-Compliance Impact Analysis 
Figure 6 shows an example impact analysis for non-
compliance in the “R5: Monitoring” requirement 
category of Figure 4. Traversing the super-concepts of 
the formal concept that characterizes “R5: Monitoring” 
in the concept lattice creates a logical and hierarchical 
argument structure that helps to systematically reason 
about the potential propagative effects of non-
compliance among requirement categories in the given 
scenario. During traversal, each super-concept and the 
requirement categories in its extent are examined by a 
certification analyst to identify potential cascading 
effects of non-compliance in the context of the target 
system. To this end, visual features of the cohesive bar 
graph can reduce the cognitive overload on the 
certification analyst by visualizing the metrics 
available for each requirement category in the extent of 
a formal concept. Traversal of the cohesive bar graphs 
at different levels of abstraction promotes a gradual 
discovery and learning process to unravel the 
propagative effect of non-compliance. 
3.2.3 Visual Metaphor: Cohesive Arc Graph. It is 
useful to visualize the degree of influence a given 
requirement category will have on the effective 
implementation of other requirement categories in a 
given scenario. Therefore, we use the “cohesive arc 
graph” visual metaphor (adopted from [16]) as shown 
in Figure 7. The requirement category of interest is 
arranged in the middle as a circle. Each arc around the 
circle corresponds to a requirement category in the 
current scenario other than the one in the middle, and 
its visual features represent the following metrics: 
? The color of an arc: Represents the compliance 
level of the requirement category (as in section 0) 
The radius of an arc: It reflects the requirement 
influence factor (RIF) metric. RIF is a ratio of the 
number of formal concepts shared between the 
requirement category in the middle and the 
requirement category represented by the arc and the 
total number of formal concepts that cover either of the 
two requirement categories in their extent. Higher the 
RIF, higher are the similarities of two requirement 
categories in correlating with other categories in the 
given scenario. RIFs allow perceiving the criticality of 
a requirement category to strengthen the level of 
compliance with a large proportion of requirements in 
the given scenario. Figure 7 visualizes the RIFs for the 
“R5: Monitoring” requirement category. It adds value to 
the analytical abilities for impact analysis in Figure 6. 
R4: Network/Internet 
Access Control 
RIF = 4/16 = 0.22
R5: Monitoring
R5
R
9: Logical Access 
C
ontrol
R
IF = 3/11 = 0.27
R3
: E
ncl
ave
 
Bo
und
ary
 De
fen
se
RIF
 = 3
/9 =
 0.3
3
R2: Product Spec &
Evaluation
RIF = 1/13 = 0.08
R8
: A
ut
he
nt
ica
tio
n
& 
Id
en
tif
ica
tio
n
RI
F 
= 
3/
10
 =
 0
.3
0
R1
0: 
Pe
rso
nn
el 
Sc
ree
nin
g
RI
F =
 2/
10
 = 
0.2
0
R6: Audit Trail
RIF = 2/8 = 0.25
R1: Production and 
I/O Controls
RIF = 1/9 = 0.11
R
7:
 S
ec
ur
ity
 
A
w
ar
en
es
s
an
d 
Tr
ai
ni
ng
R
IF
 =
 1
/7
 =
 0
.1
4
 
Figure 7: Cohesive Arc Graph Visualization of RIF 
4. Discussion 
The feasibility of producing the visualizations has 
been demonstrated in the initial implementation of the 
C&A workbench [11] [14]. Their usefulness has been 
evaluated as part of a larger case study with C&A 
experts, where the visual metaphors were found to be 
particularly useful to understand the risk assessment 
artifacts from FCA. A more elaborate discussion of 
these results will be a part of our future publications.  
Benefits of visualizations for compliance 
management [1], and to support quantitative risk-based 
decision processes to illustrate cost-effective design 
solution spaces [7] have been observed. Our 
techniques complement these approaches by providing 
capabilities to understand the large and unstructured 
space of C&A requirements, their applicability, and 
their compliance levels and associated risks in the 
context of a complex system. In the future, we will 
investigate more interactive visualizations of C&A 
requirements spaces and related evidences that 
promote software assurance among stakeholders. 
5. References 
[1] Bellamy, R.K.E., Erickson, T., et al, “Seeing is believing: 
Designing visualizations for managing risk and compliance” IBM 
Systems Journal, 46(2), Compliance Management, 2007, pp. 205   
[2] Common Criteria, Ver. 2.1. ISO/IEC 15408-1, 1999 
[3] DoD 8510.1-M: DITSCAP Application Manual. 2000 
[4] DoD Instruction 5200.40: DITSCAP, 1997. 
[5] DoDI 8500.2. IA Implementation. Feb 2003. 
[6] Donzelli, P., Basili, V., “A practical framework for eliciting and 
modeling system dependability requirements,” Journal of Systems 
and Software, Vol. 79(1), 2006, pp. 107-119. 
[7] Feather, M.S., Cornford, S.L., et al, “Experiences using 
Visualization Techniques to Present Requirements, Risks to Them 
and Options for Risk Mitigation,” REV 06, 14th RE, 2006, p. 10 
[8] Gandhi, R. A. and Lee, S. W., “Discovering and Understanding 
Multi-dimensional Correlations among Certification Requirements 
with application to Risk Assessment”, To appear in Proc. of the 15th 
IEEE Int’l RE Conf. (RE 07), October 15-19, Delhi, India, 2007. 
[9] Ganter, B., Wille, R. Formal Concept Analysis. Springer, 1996 
[10] Lee, S.W., Gandhi, R. A., “Ontology-based Active 
Requirements Engineering Framework,” In Proc. 12th Asia-Pacific 
Soft. Engg. Conf. (APSEC 05), IEEE CS Press, 2005, pp. 481-490. 
[11] Lee, S.W., Gandhi, R.A. et al.  “r-AnalytiCA: Requirements 
Analytics for Certification & Accreditation,” To appear in Proc. of 
15th IEEE Int’l RE Conf. (RE 07), Posters, Demos and Exhibits 
Session, October 15-19, Delhi, India, 2007. 
[12] Lee, S.W., Gandhi, R.A., “Requirements as Enablers for 
Software Assurance,” CrossTalk: The Journal of Defense Software 
Engineering, December Issue, 19(12), 2006, pp. 20-24. 
[13] Lee, S.W., Gandhi, R.A., Ahn, G.J., “Certification Process 
Artifacts Defined as Measurable Units for Software Assurance” Soft. 
Process: Improvement and Practice, Vol. 12(2), 2007, pp. 165-189. 
[14] Lee, S.W., Gandhi, R.A., and Wagle, S.J., “Towards a 
Requirements-driven Workbench for Supporting Software 
Certification and Accreditation,” In Proc. of the 3rd Int’l Workshop 
on Soft. Engg. for Secure System (SESS 07), at ICSE 07, 2007. 
[15] Lee, S.W., Muthurajan, D., Gandhi, R.A., et al., “Building 
decision support problem domain ontology from natural language 
requirements for software assurance,” Int’l Journal on Software 
Engg. and Knowledge Engg., 16(6), Dec. 2006, pp. 851-884. 
[16] Schedl, M., Knees, P., Widmer, G., “Interactive Poster: Using 
CoMIRVA for Visualizing Similarities Between Music Artists,” 16th 
IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS ‘05), 2005, p. 89 
[17] Thomas, J.J. Cook, K.A. (eds.), “Illuminating the Path: The 
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics,” 2005. 
[18] Tonella, P., “Using a concept lattice of decomposition slices for 
program understanding and impact analysis,” IEEE TSE 29(6), 2003. 
[19] Voas, J., “Certifying software for high-assurance environments,” 
IEEE Software, Vol.16 (4), Jul/Aug 1999, pp.48-54.  
[20] Wong, P.C., Thomas, J., “Visual Analytics,” IEEE Computer 
Graphics and Applications, Vol. 24(5), 2004, pp. 20- 21. 

