Towards a Visual Analytics Framework for Handling Complex Business
Processes
William Ribarsky
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC, 28262
ribarsky@uncc.edu
Derek Xiaoyu Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
xiaoyu.wang@uncc.edu
Wenwen Dou
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
wdou1@uncc.edu
William J. Tolone
Department of Software and Information Systems
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
William.Tolone@uncc.edu
Abstract
Organizing data that can come from anywhere in the
complex business process in a variety of types is a challeng-
ing task. To tackle the challenge, we introduce the concepts
of virtual sensors and process events. In addition, a visual
interface is presented in this paper to aid deploying the vir-
tual sensors and analyzing process events information. The
virtual sensors permit collection from the streams of data at
any point in the process and transmission of the data in a
form ready to be analyzed by the central analytics engine.
Process events provide a uniform expression of data of dif-
ferent types in a form that can be automatically prioritized
and that is readily meaningful to the users. Through the
visual interface, the user can place the virtual sensors, in-
teract with and group the process events, and delve into the
details of the process at any point. The visual interface pro-
vides a multiview investigative environment for sensemak-
ing and decisive action by the user.
1. Introduction
The idea of “just in time (JIT) manufacturing” has been
around for some time and has been implemented in large
scale production environments. Lately there has been the
need for dynamic just in time manufacturing where the dis-
tribution and even types of products produced may change
fairly quickly, often in response to a previously unforeseen
need. This is the case for some large government entities
that must supply materiel in support of changing missions
and for some large manufacturers.
In this paper we describe a framework we have devel-
oped in cooperation with a partner engaged in dynamic
manufacturing. A major issue is that the business process
(in this case manufacture and delivery of a variety of sys-
tems, which could be complex themselves or components
of even larger systems) is complex and changing. It can be
across several parts of a large manufacturing and delivery
organization and across many different suppliers. A disrup-
tion at any point in the organization or among the suppliers
could result in a failure to deliver full capabilities on time,
which would be a serious problem.
A main issue that can arise is shown in the following ex-
ample, illustrated in Figure 1. Suppose the assembly of a
system that must be deployed by a certain date is depen-
dent on the availability of a component that is provided by
an external supplier. Further the component is not installed
till late in the assembly process. Since this is a dynamic
manufacturing process where different systems with differ-
ent externally supplied components are required to be pro-
duced at different times, the organizational structure cannot
be closely aligned with the manufacturing process. In this
case the procurement and assembly components are in dif-
ferent part of the organizational structure with different re-
porting paths. In the illustration, a clue to the problem is
given by unusual communication being opened up between
the parts acquisition/preparation department and the qual-
ity assurance manager. (This isn’t the only possible path;
the communication between the production supervisor and
the technical manager could possibly be due to the same
or a related problem.) There may also be unusual activity
within a department even without external communication.
In Figure 1, this is picked up by a “virtual sensor” (dis-
Figure 1. An organization structure for a production operation with unusual communication paths.
cussed further below and in Sec. 5.) Unless there is appro-
priate and timely communication across the structure and in
particular to the operations manager (and above), the man-
ufacturing process will break down. This is to be contrasted
with a non-dynamic JIT process. In this case, the steps
of the process are more fixed, permitting better organiza-
tional alignment from the start and better communication.
Furthermore, non-dynamic JIT permits predictive planning
where a forecast model based on past production and other
factors is imposed to predict inventory needs, among other
needs [15]. Such predictive methods will be much harder
to develop in dynamic JIT manufacturing. Finally, most JIT
planning approaches have been applied to much more uni-
form manufacturing processes (e.g., the production of a cer-
tain car model) than are the case here, where quite different
systems are produced at different times.
The main contribution of this paper is the development
of a framework to attack the above problem by apply-
ing a visual analytics approach. Although there has been
work in process-aware information systems (see Related
Work), these approaches haven’t been applied to manufac-
turing processes nor, more importantly, are they as compre-
hensively data-driven as our approach. To enable our ap-
proach, we have introduced two new concepts: virtual sen-
sors and process events. Virtual sensors are software collec-
tor/transmitters that can be placed at will anywhere in the
data flow of the manufacturing or production process. They
are meant to deal with a range of data from quantitative
process information to communications among operators or
managers. Since the virtual sensors monitor the stream of
data over time, the visual analytics framework can identify
process events, meaningful occurrences in time with respect
to the process. We have shown how general event-based
approaches can organize complex data histories in a semi-
automatic way [14, 19]. What this means is that the visual
analytics analysis can reveal the data process and through it
the underlying business process. If, for example, the data
process does not conform with the organizational model of
the manufacturing business, this can signal problems that
should be addressed.
2. Related Work
There is a history of business process visualization in the
business industry [3, 13, 16, 20]. In the area of customer re-
lations management, Azvine et al. presented a configurable
business process analytics tool that constantly monitors the
performance of a decision model on both overall and in-
dividual levels with the goals of customer satisfaction and
operational excellence [1]. Noting that existing business an-
alytic applications are usually closed-loop decision making
systems which only present output to operational managers,
Azvine et al. incorporated visualization components into an
intelligent business analytics system in order to put users
in the loop and adjust business operations based on users’
analyses in real time.
In the domain of Process-Aware Information System
(PAIS), which pertains to both administrative processes and
cross-organizational processes, visualization techniques
have been used to aid in the understanding of process
schemas and their run-time behavior through simulation [7]
and process mining [11]. For example, to improve business
process models, Alast et al. combined process mining with
visual analytics to incorporate human judgment into other-
wise static business process models [11]. On the one hand,
process mining supports automatic discovery of a business
model and checking how a process model conforms to ac-
tual process executions. On the other hand, visual analyt-
ics combines automated analysis with interactive visualiza-
tions to allow decision-makers to apply their flexibility, cre-
ativity, and domain knowledge to come to an effective un-
derstanding of situations in the context of large data sets.
The authors noted that insights obtained from visualizations
could be used to improve processes by removing inefficien-
cies and addressing non-compliance. In addition to process
mining, visualization techniques have also been applied to
visualizing work items for an overall business process [12].
Leoni et al. incorporated visualizations to support work as-
signment in process-aware information systems. The visu-
alizations enable users to better select work items to ensure
the performance of the overall business process [12].
3. Probing Dynamic Business Processes
In collaboration with our partner, we have developed the
following set of questions that must be effectively addressed
in order to achieve a successful dynamic business process:
• What are overall trends? Is the overall process on
schedule?
• What are the detailed trends for individual programs
within the manufacturing and production process? (A
program is the production of a particular system, usu-
ally distinct from other systems that may also be pro-
duced during the production process.)
• What?s the cost-schedule performance over time?
• What is the capacity of each part of the operation, in-
cluding excess capacity?
• Is something going wrong and where (including things
that have not been fully recognized yet)?
• Is resource re-allocation needed, and where?
• If there is a problem, what expertise should be de-
ployed to most quickly solve it?
To have any chance of answering these questions, the
production executives must have continuously available the
latest information on the manufacturing process at the pro-
gram and component levels. To this end, our partner has
developed a “dashboard” that accepts data from all stages
of the process for all programs. The dashboard system has
both an interface and a data collector that provides a sum-
mary analysis to determine where the process, at any stage,
stands with respect to a few simple benchmarks. Impor-
tantly, production managers can provide annotations and
comments at any point in the process. They can also com-
municate with each other or the executives via the dash-
board. The dashboard displays comparative information on
the production process for all components and programs. It
shows some information on trends and when a component
is falling behind schedule according to a simple milestone
analysis. It has some drill-down capability so that the exec-
utive can get more information about why a trend is occur-
ring.
Although this sort of analysis is necessary, our partner
has found it is not sufficient for enabling a dynamic business
process without interruptions or missed deadlines. In par-
ticular, the dashboard does not have a way to effectively or-
ganize and use all the information it collects, especially the
annotations and comments that are critical to understanding
the production process. In addition, disruptions in different
parts of the organization may affect downstream production
in unexpected ways. Further, there may be no direct line of
communication between the parts of the organization that
will be affected (although there could be informal commu-
nication). Neither of these aspects are readily apparent to
the manager in the dashboard setup. Finally, since unex-
pected disruptions will arise, it is only possible to know of
them after the fact and often with incomplete information
as to cause. Thus it is difficult to put into place predictive
or even prospective monitoring and response, nor to pursue
some of the questions above such as those having to do with
re-allocating resources and expertise as an event is unfold-
ing. In the next sections, we discuss how visual analytics
can be applied to address these issues and produce more
successful outcomes for dynamic business processes.
4. Visual Analytics Framework
Visual analytics is the science of analytic reasoning fa-
cilitated by interactive visual interfaces [9]. It is meant to
support exploratory analysis leading to discoveries since it
is frequently applied to complex real world problems with
large amounts of data. These problems are often open-
ended with no clear path to solutions [9], and, as a result,
it is often unclear what pertinent knowledge the data may
contain [9]. Thus the analysis needs to be exploratory to
support discovery of hidden relations, patterns, and trends.
Figure 2. Overall visual analytics framework for complex business processes.
Once discovered, these aspects should be investigated in
detail, by referring back to original data and gathering ad-
ditional evidence to confirm or refute hypotheses that are
formed. A comprehensive visual analytics approach would
support all these aspects. In this paper we apply such a
comprehensive approach, employing visual analytics meth-
ods for both automated analyses and user-led exploration
through the interactive visual interface.
Our first step is to embed the dashboard system in a vi-
sual analytics framework. This is depicted schematically in
Figure 2. The repository of data sources (lower left) will
inevitably contain both structured and unstructured data.
Since a range of sources will be involved, the repository
will be heterogeneous. Since useful information could be
found anywhere (including perhaps outside the business)
and, once found, should be used, some of these sources
could be incomplete or fragmentary. Analytic tools must
thus be flexible, able to handle different kinds of data, in-
cluding incomplete data, yet producing results that con-
tribute to a “common picture” that will be meaningful to
the user.
Inevitably some of the data in a business process will be
textual, containing comments, annotations, descriptions, re-
ports, human communications, and so on. These texts will
tend to be partly or mostly unstructured. Therefore we ap-
ply methods we have developed for extracting topics and
topic-based events over time from unstructured texts [9].
These results are combined with named entity extraction for
people’s names, dates including future dates, and locations
(if desired). The analysis can be applied, with approxima-
tions, either to streaming data [9] with results in a couple of
minutes or less, or more slowly and accurately to histories
over a period of time. These methods are quite flexible and
have been applied to many different types of texts including
reports, research papers, patent data, twitter streams, online
news, and customer messages [15, 19, 18]. To these tex-
tual analyses, we add methods for exploring categorical data
and numerical data, including finding trends over time. The
categorical methods, for example, reveal relationships be-
tween multiple categories at selected times or time ranges,
which are related to specific events in the topical event anal-
ysis. For all these methods plus the embedded dashboard,
we develop a new interactive visual interface, as described
in Sec. 6.
The analytic methods apply not only to the data reposi-
tory but also to the business processes embedded in the mid-
dle of Figure 2 and, indeed, even to the model repository at
the lower right. The business processes produce new infor-
mation themselves and thus must be included to produce a
most useful and comprehensive common picture. (This is
indicated by thickening red lines that cross the middle of
the figure.) In fact, as we have seen above, it is quite im-
portant to analyze information created during the business
process since that will produce direct knowledge of the ca-
pabilities and capacities of different parts of the process as
well as signal when things are going wrong and what parts
of the process are affected.
A general definition of a physical event is “a meaning-
ful occurrence in space and time” [14]. For the purposes
of this framework, we modify this definition to focus on
“process events”, which we define as “meaningful occur-
rences in time with respect to the process”. In both cases,
time is central. For this framework, bursts of activity over
a relatively short time scale, unexpected trends or relation-
ships (that appear in a short time span), or outliers could all
qualify as process events. We have shown that events can
be automatically found and organized (including putting
them in a hierarchical structure) for social media such as
Twitter [16]. This work, involving topic modeling, also
demonstrates how users can quickly attach meanings to the
events. The hierarchical structure becomes significant when
one deals with complex data for which one can have many
events. As data grows in size and comprehensiveness, it will
tend to get complex in this way. Certainly the complex man-
ufacturing and production processes considered here will
benefit from hierarchical structuring, which will give them
high level meaning and make the overall processes easier to
understand.
5. Virtual Sensors
We now have the mechanisms we need to build the ef-
fective framework illustrated in Figure 2. The main idea is
to instrument the whole business process (acquisition, pro-
duction, deployment, etc.) with “virtual sensors”. These
sensors are flexible so that they can access any data stream
(e.g., unstructured text, categorical data, numerical data,
model outputs) anywhere, such as in the data repository, in
the business processes themselves, or in the models. Typ-
ically sensors are placed at a set of general points that are
effective for monitoring many different types of production.
Then they are placed at additional points that are useful for
a specific type of business process. Finally they can quickly
be placed at other points by the manager, often to under-
stand some abnormality in the process. This set of net-
worked sensors then report to the visual analytics layer at
the top of Figure 2. This layer provides a set of “sensemak-
ing” capabilities to explore, understand, reason with, and
test out hypotheses w.r.t. the sensor results. Since these re-
sults are expressed in a common language of process events,
they can be displayed together and manipulated in an inter-
active visualization, though some details with respect to the
events will be different depending on the underlying data or
process. At any point, the manager can select one or more
events and get at the underlying data.
The structure of the virtual sensor is depicted in Figure 3.
The bottom layer grabs data directly from the business pro-
Figure 3. Virtual sensor structure.
cess stream. In the case of the business partner mentioned
above, the dashboard already collection points that can be
used to insert the sensors at several places. The middle layer
converts these data to a standard internal format recognized
by the analysis framework in Figure 2. It also attaches what-
ever metadata or labels are available (time range and time
stamps, data descriptors, data units, etc.). The top layer
transmits the data and metadata to the analysis framework.
Full analysis is performed by an analytics engine in
the analysis framework, depending on the type of data.
For instance, the analytics engine applies topic model-
ing and topic-based event extraction to unstructured text
messages [19]. It applies temporal signal processing and
anomaly detection to streams of numerical data to pull out
both events and anomalies. It performs categorical and mul-
tidimensional analysis to categorical or attribute data. It
performs relational and other statistical analyses to con-
nect events across different types of data and to find sim-
ilar signatures. These analyses are automated and all re-
sults are in a common event-based format regardless of the
original input format (using the process event definition in
Sec. 4.). Thus, for example, alignments of events from the
text messages with events from categorical or numerical
data streams would be readily spotted in the embedded vi-
sual interface described in the next section and then delved
for deeper relationships. The common event-based format
has the capacity for depicting additional “decorations” of
the events stemming from details of the different types of
original streaming data.
6. The Embedded Visual Interface
The visual interface is designed to support sensemaking
in the business processes. More specifically, the visual in-
terface incorporates 4 different views that highlight tempo-
ral, geospatial, and topical summaries using both the infor-
mation available a priori (such as knowledge of the organi-
zation hierarchy) and information collected in real time by
Figure 4. Embedded visual interface with labels to indicate functions.
the virtual sensors.
At the heart of the visual interface is the embedding into
the external automatic and real-time sensory data repository
and analyzer. The visual interface is set up to run on a single
user’s computer with intimate access to the external repos-
itory; it captures information flows to and from that user
around office documents, calendars, emails, organizational
charts, and Web pages, etc. Depending on the user analysis
needs, the visual interface utilizes various meta-information
that comes along with the virtual sensor results. In particu-
lar, it collects information about which documents, emails,
and web pages were read for that user, and how long they
were open. It also collects document metadata, such as in-
formation about the senders and recipients of email mes-
sages.
All this heterogeneous data is stored in a unified NoSQL
external data repository for future analysis. On the fact col-
lection level, tools like UpLib [8], can be utilized to ex-
tract information from and about each data input, including
its title and authors, its text, the people and other entities
that it mentions, its paragraphs and its images. All of the
captured information is indexed and grouped with its re-
lated documents. On the event level, our signal processing
then performs event analysis, time series analysis, cluster-
ing, and narrative reconstruction based on the collected or-
ganizational facts. All this is then interactively presented to
the user through the embedded visualization interface.
6.1. Visual Components
Instead of presenting the diverse analyzed event struc-
tures through a keyword search interface, our framework
embeds the investigative retrieval cues (e.g., who, when,
where, what) into a coordinated multilevel visualization
system.
At a high level, our visual interface encodes the four cues
with a set of four visualizations, each of which presents a
particular aspect of the organizational and business process
activity. To provide a lower level detailed view, our inter-
face also presents a visualization that integrates related ac-
tivity information for a single worker or a sensor. Using this
multi-level structure, the interface helps users to cohesively
find the specific details they need.
Organizational Hierarchy View To give an overview of
the complex operational environment, we designed an Or-
ganizational Hierarchy view that gives a cohesive overview
while encapsulating organizational knowledge. Therefore,
a user can start the analysis process by recalling event ac-
tivities beginning from any retrieval cue that they remem-
ber (e.g., the department that mostly likely to initiated the
process), or they can focus on events or cross-organization
communication links that the automated analysis has identi-
fied as important. (See the application example in Sec. 7 for
an illustration of the latter.) Interaction in any view cause
updates in coordinated views so that the maximum associ-
ated information is provided permitting the user to converge
on the desired conclusion quickly.
The Where: Geospatial view In the geospatial view, lo-
cations involved in the overall business process are high-
lighted in an interactive map. The importance of the loca-
tion is represented by the size of the circles and could be
determined by user-selected criteria. The numbering on the
circle indicates the sequence of the manufacturing or deliv-
ering process. The color of the circles is used to denote
main/alternative supply or manufacturing locations. The
map supports standard user interactions such as zooming
and panning. The map is coordinated with other views in
that selections within the map will filter to events related to
the chosen locations.
The When: Activity Heatmap View To facilitate multi-
scale temporal analysis, we developed an Activity Heatmap
view that allows analysts to monitor events in both retro-
spective and future time frames. This view shows how a
business process unfolds over time. It presents both the
number of organizational activities (e.g. message exchange)
that have interacted with business process, and the types of
that business and its key personnel. This view is created as
an interactive calendar for ease of interaction and it shows
the temporal trends and patterns of organizational activities.
Each cell in Figure 4C represents aggregated mentions of
that date in all the existing business processes; dates that
have been mentioned more frequently appear in a darker
shade of blue. For example, we can quickly see that there
are multiple delivery events that happen on the July 30th of
this year.
Using this view, a manager can highlight a time range to
select a subset of data (e.g., an hour to a day or months) to
be analyzed retrospectively. Besides showing general trends
and patterns, the temporal view also allows the user to drill
down into time periods. When the user selects a time period
on the horizontal axis in the center of the view, our visual
interface will zoom into that period of time and present the
most relevant business information.
The Who: Communication Activities between partici-
pating parties To help corporate managers and decision
makers efficiently retrieve specific events of interest, we de-
signed the Communication activities view to aggregate both
the documents and the people that a user has interacted with
during a particular period of time. Like Lee et al. [10], our
activities view allows the user to filter and sort information
based on automatically-extracted data facets, including dif-
ferent communication types and format. The user can visu-
ally depict the relationships between the extracted organi-
zational facts with selected business projects. For example,
the user can choose to see or hide activities with email, with
office documents, with Web pages, or with people. Each of
these facets can be turned on or off by pressing an associ-
ated button.
In order to fit the activity information into a reasonable
guided exploration, our visual interface sorts events by im-
portance, and displays the most important documents at the
top and with the most salient presentation by computing
the importance value centered around the relevance to its
core business process. As described in Sec. ??, the orga-
nizational hierarchy view is also important in highlighting
which events should be followed. In addition, to enable
fast exploration, a summarized information panel (see Fig-
ure 4(D) right) is shown when the mouse hovers over a vi-
sual element representing an activity. Like the Document
Card [17], this panel includes a readable thumbnail and ag-
gregated information about that visual element. If the user
needs more details, the user can double click on the visual
element to bring up a specific detail view.
The What: Communication Summary by Topics To
support the analysis of communications among different
teams and parties during the overall business process, we
designed the Communication Summary view, which pro-
vides an overview and permits analysis based on streaming
or accumulated communication data. The analysis enables
users to discover pressing issues that need to be addressed
in order to keep the entire business process on track.
We assume most of the communication data are unstruc-
tured texts sent between communicating parties or attached
as annotation to the stages of the business process. The vir-
tual sensors collect all communications and put all the re-
ceived communications into a database. The attribute in the
database contains sender, receiver, time stamp, communica-
tion content, and other available information. All collected
texts are then summarized into semantically meaningful
topics using state-of-the-art topic models [2] as shown in
Figure 4B. The topic summary presents individual topics
to summarize what the communications are about. Cou-
pling with the temporal trend of the topics shown in Fig-
ure 4A, one can quickly discover when a burst of communi-
cations has occurred and what issues were discussed. Other
forms of data that are collected and analyzed are discussed
in Sec. 7.
We now have complete support for the sensemaking pro-
cess depicted at the top of Figure 2. The foraging stage
is supported by the distribution of virtual sensors and their
outputs. The encoding is supported by the conversion
to a common event-based format in the analytics engine.
The reasoning (including hypothesis-building and testing)
is supported by the exploratory visual interface, which in-
cludes placement of virtual sensors where needed, and re-
view of original data. All these stages are iterative and inter-
connected through the visual interface. In the next section
we will discuss how this sensemaking can be applied.
7. An Application Example
Figure 5. Illustration of virtual sensors de-
ployed in manufacturing process. Four vir-
tual sensors are labeled V.S. in the diagram.
In this section, we will build on the example given in
the Introduction and illustrated in Figure 1. A real world
manufacturing operation of any size will have a bigger or-
ganizational structure than depicted in Figure 1 and will
have a layer of senior management (C-level: CEO, CIO,
CTO, CFO, etc.).above the production manager. Because
of complexity, the changing nature of dynamic JIT manu-
facturing and production, and the fact that signals of inter-
est can come from unexpected places, our approach must
be exploratory, bringing information from disparate sources
into a common picture for evaluation and action. However,
it is also data-driven, and since the initial data analytics es-
pecially are automated, there will be some tension between
automated and user-directed processes. The visual analytics
framework and the interactive visual interface are designed
to minimize this tension and to make these processes work
together in support of effective user actions.
A main aspect of the data-driven analysis is to identify
process events (defined in Sec. 4) and to arrange them so
that they tell a meaningful story when interpreted by the
user. In the case of the dashboard used by our business
partner, process events can be derived from numerical and
categorical data collected at each stage of the dynamic man-
ufacturing process, status reports indicating whether each
stage or component of the process is on, behind, or ahead of
schedule at that point, and individual annotation including
comments by managers or engineers for that stage. There
is also a mechanism for communication among managers,
engineers, operators, and supervisors across the organiza-
tion. The dashboard thus provides comprehensive data that
we use in the above implementation of the visual analyt-
ics framework. However, though it provides comprehensive
data, we have heard from the executive in charge that the
dashboard is not sufficient to fulfill the need for on-time dy-
namic processing with minimum disruptiontoo many real or
potentials points for breakdown can be overlooked; likewise
too many opportunities for improvement and efficiency can
be missed.
Thus we instrument the dashboard data and annota-
tion collection points throughout the manufacturing pro-
cess with virtual sensors, as illustrated in Figure 5. Process
events are then identified in multiple ways. One way of
doing so is by identifying bursts of activity over relatively
short time scales in the topics derived from the textual an-
notations and communications. There could also be a trend
in the numerical data that is unexpected compared to the
normal manufacturing process. In the example here of not
having a particular part when needed farther along in the
manufacturing process, the burst of activity centers around
one or more topics derived from both the annotations and
the communications among workers indicating the part, the
component system it goes into, and the supplier. An ap-
propriate scale for this burst of activity is a few days. (In
other words, text messages on the same topic accumulate in
a burst over a few days.) Named entity extraction is also
applied to the texts to indicate what sections of the organi-
zation (and individuals) are communicating, the names of
parts, systems, and suppliers, and dates mentioned in the
texts (either past or future). In addition, analysis of the in-
ventory signal can indicate a drop in the supply of the cru-
cial part over time that becomes significant enough to gen-
erate another event. The importance of the process events
from the topic analysis is further raised because communi-
cation occurs across organizational boundaries between the
parts manager, the quality assurance manager, and the tech-
nical manager (and their teams). The organizational knowl-
edge of what is and is not unusual communication across
the organizational hierarchy is encoded in the visual analyt-
ics framework. We have shown that such temporal bursts
of topical activity can be automatically identified and that
they can be connected to real events with high probability.
We have successfully done this event analysis for streaming
Twitter data (e.g., events during the development of the Oc-
cupy Wall Street movement over a year’s time) [5] and col-
lections of research proposal abstracts and full-text research
papers [6] where the events are often connected with new
programs started by funding agencies. These quite different
text collections and quite different time scales demonstrate
that the topical event-identification methods are general.
Up to this point the analysis is all automatic, but the pro-
cess event results based on both statistical techniques (e.g.,
signal processing) and process and organization knowledge
permits highlighting of events, anywhere in the process or
organizational structure, that are likely to be of interest to
the high-level manager. The manager starts to interact with
these results via the visual interface in Figure 4. Through
the central organization hierarchy view, he sees highlighted
links between the parts group and the quality manager and
technical management groups that he knows are unusual.
A check of the communication activity view shows when
these bursts of communication occurred. The problem has
not yet shown up in the calendar view (i.e., the affected pro-
cess components are not yet falling behind schedule). He
can then dig down to the actual texts of topical messages
and can filter for geographical distributions of both suppli-
ers and the finished systems, which will be displayed in the
geographical view. He can set a new virtual sensor to watch
the inventory stream (and to collect historical data). If there
is a more complex problem, there may be several relevant
topics. In this case, the hierarchical topic view (commu-
nication summary view) is useful. The view shows which
topics are related and can be grouped and also permits re-
grouping by the manager. The data associated with the top-
ics, including text messages and other data, are reorganized
as well. In summary, the manager can quickly find issues
that should concern him and then effectively analyze them,
moving towards making key decisions.
The visual analytics framework has other useful at-
tributes. The process of investigation by the manager that
leads to a conclusion and a plan of action is itself captured in
terms of selected process events, topics, the manager’s own
annotations, and interactions with the views in the visual in-
terface. We have found in our studies of bank fraud analysts
that an interface such as this can reveal high level strategies
and its own meaningful story of how an expert reaches a
decision [4]. This story can be shared with other managers,
giving a rich argument for a course of action. In addition,
like the fraud analysts, the managers in this dynamic man-
ufacturing process have expertise developed through expe-
rience that is not easy to share. However in the case of our
partner, the problem is exacerbated because, due to the na-
ture of the business, there is some flow of managers into and
out of their positions and thus a knowledge and experience
gap. Use of the visual interface and underlying analytics by
experts for a variety of situations can be captured and made
available as training modules for these new managers, giv-
ing them insights that would be hard to obtain without long
experience.
8. Conclusion
We have presented a visual analytics framework for han-
dling complex business processes. It is applied to dynamic
just in time manufacturing, but it is applicable to a range of
agile business processes.
In order to organize data that can come from anywhere
in the complex business process and can be in a variety of
types, we have introduced the concepts of virtual sensors
and process events. The virtual sensors permit collection
from the streams of data at any point in the process and
transmission of the data in a form ready to be analyzed by
the central analytics engine. Process events provide a uni-
form expression of data of different types in a form that
can be automatically prioritized and that is readily mean-
ingful to the users. Through the visual interface, the user
can place the virtual sensors, interact with and group the
process events, and delve into the details of the process at
any point. The visual interface provides a multiview inves-
tigative environment for sensemaking and decisive action
by the user.
We have shown that with this visual analytics environ-
ment, the user can answer the major questions that must be
addressed in order to achieve a successful dynamic produc-
tion environment. These include finding overall trends and
then detailed specific trends in the production process; de-
termining, as early as possible, what may be going wrong
and where in the process; determining what the capacities
of various parts of the process are and what resource re-
allocation is needed; and determining what expertise should
be deployed to most quickly solve a problem.
We are now working on detailed set up and evaluation
of this framework. The response to the initial design and
implementation by our partner is quite positive. The event-
and process-based analysis presented here is of particular
interest because it will bring data from multiple streams (es-
pecially textual annotations and comments) into a common
view for analysis and decision-making. These are new ca-
pabilities for the partner. We are now embarking on a full
project to use these capabilities in detail. This will lead to
improvements and to the reporting of concrete case studies.
References
[1] B. Azvine, D. D. Nauck, C. Ho, K. Broszat, and J. Lim. In-
telligent process analytics for crm. BT Technology Journal,
24(1):60–69, Jan. 2006.
[2] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:993–1022, Mar. 2003.
[3] R. Bobrik, M. Reichert, and T. Bauer. View-based process
visualization. In Proceedings of the 5th international con-
ference on Business process management, BPM’07, pages
88–95, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. Springer-Verlag.
[4] R. Chang, M. Ghoniem, R. Kosara, W. Ribarsky, J. Yang,
E. Suma, C. Ziemkiewicz, D. Kern, and A. Sudjianto. Wire-
vis: Visualization of categorical, time-varying data from fi-
nancial transactions. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Sym-
posium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, VAST
’07, pages 155–162, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE
Computer Society.
[5] W. Dou, D. Wang, Z. Ma, and W. Ribarsky. Discover
diamonds-in-the-rough using interactive visual analytics
system-tweets as a collective diary of the occupy movement,
2013.
[6] W. Dou, X. Wang, R. Chang, and W. Ribarsky. Paral-
leltopics: A probabilistic approach to exploring document
collections. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST), 2011 IEEE Conference on, pages 231–240, 2011.
[7] G. Hansen. Automated Business Process Reengineering:
Using the Power of Visual Simulation Strategies to Improve
Performance and Profit. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
1997.
[8] W. C. Janssen. The uplib personal digital library system. In
Proceedings of the 5th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on
Digital libraries, JCDL ’05, pages 410–410, New York, NY,
USA, 2005. ACM.
[9] T. Kraft, X. Wang, J. Delawder, D. W., L. Yu, and W. Rib-
arsky. Less after the fact: Investigative visual analysis of
events from streaming twitter. In IEEE symposium on large
data analysis and visualization, 2013.
[10] B. Lee, G. Smith, G. G. Robertson, M. Czerwinski, and D. S.
Tan. Facetlens: exposing trends and relationships to sup-
port sensemaking within faceted datasets. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’09, pages 1293–1302, New York, NY, USA,
2009. ACM.
[11] A. Leoni, M. de, W. van der, and A. t. Hofstede. Process
mining and visual analytics: Breathing life into business
process models. BPM Center Report BPM-11-16, 31pp,
2011.
[12] M. Leoni, W. Aalst, and A. Hofstede. Visual support for
work assignment in process-aware information systems. In
M. Dumas, M. Reichert, and M.-C. Shan, editors, Busi-
ness Process Management, volume 5240 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 67–83. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, 2008.
[13] P. Oude Luttighuis, M. Lankhorst, R. Van De Wetering,
R. Bal, and H. Van Den Berg. Visualising business pro-
cesses. Comput. Lang., 27(1-3):39–59, Apr. 2001.
[14] W. Ribarsky, E. Sauda, J. Balmer, and Z. Wartell. The whole
story: Building the computer history of a place. In Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Science (HICSS 2012,
2012.
[15] S. A. Ruffa. Going lean: How the best companies apply lean
manufacturing principles to shatter uncertainty, drive inno-
vation, and maximize profits. AMACOM (American Man-
agement Association), 2008.
[16] A. Streit, B. Pham, and R. Brown. Visualization support for
managing large business process specifications. In W. Aalst,
B. Benatallah, F. Casati, and F. Curbera, editors, Business
Process Management, volume 3649 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 205–219. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, 2005.
[17] J. Teevan, C. Alvarado, M. S. Ackerman, and D. R. Karger.
The perfect search engine is not enough: a study of orien-
teering behavior in directed search. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, CHI ’04, pages 415–422, New York, NY, USA, 2004.
ACM.
[18] X. Wang, W. Dou, Z. Ma, J. Villalobos, Y. Chen, T. Kraft,
and W. Ribarsky. I-si: Scalable architecture for analyzing la-
tent topical-level information from social media data. Comp.
Graph. Forum, 31(3pt4):1275–1284, June 2012.
[19] X. Wang, W. Dou, W. Ribarsky, D. Skau, and M. X. Zhou.
Leadline: Interactive visual analysis of text data through
event identification and exploration. In Proceedings of the
2012 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (VAST), VAST ’12, pages 93–102, Washington,
DC, USA, 2012. IEEE Computer Society.
[20] W. Wright. Business visualization adds value. Computer
Graphics and Applications, IEEE, 18(4):39–, 1998.

