Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2010
G. Melançon, T. Munzner, and D. Weiskopf
(Guest Editors)
Volume 29 (2010), Number 3
An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge
Management
Submission # 326
Abstract
Bridges deteriorate over their life cycles and require continuous maintenance to ensure their structural integrity,
and in turn, the safety of the public. Maintaining bridges is a multi-faceted operation that requires both domain
knowledge and analytics techniques over large data sources. Although most existing bridge management systems
(BMS) are very efficient at data storage, they are not as effective at providing analytical capabilities or as flexible
at supporting different inspection technologies. In this paper, we present a visual analytics system that extends the
capability of current BMSs. Based on a nation-wide survey and our interviews with bridge managers, we designed
our system to be customizable so that it can provide interactive exploration, information correlation, and domain-
oriented data analysis. When tested by bridge managers of the U.S. Department of Transportation, we validated
that our system provides bridge managers with the necessary features for performing in-depth analysis of bridges
from a variety of perspectives that are in accordance to their typical workflow.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation—Line and curve generation
1. Introduction
Bridges are an important component of the U.S. transporta-
tion system, and maintaining their structural integrity is cru-
cial to the safety of millions of people. However, bridges de-
teriorate over the course of their designed life cycles. The
steel corrodes, the concrete spalls, and the stone cracks.
Without proper maintenance, these deteriorations may cause
severe damages that might lead to potential catastrophes.
In theory, bridge engineers can predict the service life of
bridges based on computing each bridge’s deterioration rate
and establish a suitable maintenance plan [DET06]. How-
ever, since the presumed service conditions of a bridge may
change, the bridge’s deterioration rate often varies from its
theoretical expectations. In practice, it has been observed
that deterioration rates of similar bridges can vary signifi-
cantly due to their local weather environments, traffic pat-
terns, etc. [DET06]. Therefore, to ensure the integrity of a
bridge and to prevent severe deteriorations, it is very impor-
tant to establish regular inspections and to provide necessary
bridge maintenances [Bri93] [MRG?01].
Since 1968, the U.S. Department Of Transportation (US-
DOT) has committed to monitoring and maintaining all
bridges across the states. Currently, bridge inspections are
typically completed over a 2-year cycle. According to the
federal inspection coding guidance [Wes04], these inspec-
tions focus on assessing bridges from both structural and ex-
ternal factors, including physical structure conditions, traffic
volume and patterns, surrounding environments, etc. At the
end of a typical bridge inspection, over one hundred data
items are often recorded and stored in a bridge management
system (BMS) [Hea07]. This collected data subsequently
serves as input to most bridge managers’ maintenance plan-
ning processes.
Given the importance of bridges, one would hope that
most bridges are maintained in a timely manner. However,
according to the 2009 American Society of Civil Engi-
neers report, currently more than 26 percent of the nation’s
599,766 bridges are either structurally deficient or function-
ally obsolete [Ame09]. Furthermore, given the limited bud-
get and other resources, not all of the bridges can be main-
tained immediately. In order to utilize the limited budget
and resource effectively, most bridge managers develop their
own strategies to prioritize and determine the order in which
bridges should be maintained.
While these strategies have largely balanced the limited
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
2 Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management
Figure 1: This is the overview of the entire system, including views for Microsoft Virtual Earth(center), Parallel Coordinates
(top corners), Scatter Plots (middle left), Temporal Analysis (third row right), and the original data (bottom row). Per-Bridge
Detail View(middle right). Several items are highlighted with colors.
resources with the upkeep of bridges across the country, the
collapse of the I-35 bridge in Minneapolis during August
2007 serves as a devastating reminder that the complex-
ity of bridge management still demands novel techniques
and proper tools to interpret and understand bridge data.
Therefore, soon after the tragedy, members of our university
formed a research partnership with the USDOT, the North
Carolina State Department of Transportation (NCDOT), and
the American Association of State Highway and Transporta-
tion Officials (AASHTO) to investigate novel approaches in
assisting the bridge management process.
One of our first actions under this research partnership
was to conduct a nation-wide survey [CRR09] to understand
the usage of current BMSs and to identify potential areas
of improvement. 35 out of 50 state DOTs responded to our
survey, and the result indicates that the current bridge man-
agement systems are often insufficient in supporting bridge
analysis. As reported by several state DOTs, the current
BMSs are very efficient at data storage, but they are not as
effective in providing efficient data explorations and analy-
sis. In addition, some state DOTs further indicated that these
BMSs are rigid in structure and cannot be easily adapted to
support individual bridge manager’s routines. In summary,
almost all states expressed the need of having a management
system that enables them to be more effective at analyzing
their bridges, and the system needs to be customizable for
assisting their individual workflows.
Based on their feedback, we identified three types of
bridge analyses that are often essential in bridge manager’s
decision-making process, namely, structural analysis, tem-
poral analysis and geospatial analysis. While the use of these
three analysis processes and their usage patterns may vary in
each bridge manager’s workflow, we have found these anal-
ysis steps to be necessary for bridge managers to analyze the
bridge data, understand the severity of deteriorations, and to
make further maintenance decisions.
Using these three analysis processes as foundation, we de-
signed and developed an interactive, exploratory visual ana-
lytics system for analyzing bridge data. Our system encodes
the three processes as a group of four coordinated visual-
izations and allows the bridge manager to choose different
combinations of visualizations and to customize them to fit
into their own analysis workflow. To evaluate the system,
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management 3
we conducted expert evaluations with bridge managers from
NCDOT and found that most managers believed our system
to be useful and complimentary to their existing analysis
processes. We further identified ways in which our system
could be quickly incorporated into their daily routines.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion 2 characterizes the analysis processes of domain experts
and describes our system’s targeted users. Section 3 provides
more detail about the limitations of current BMSs. Section
4 presents our visual analytics system. Section 5 provides
several scenarios in which our system can facilitate bridge
management. In Section 6, we present our evaluation with
domain experts and our discussion for advancing from cur-
rent stage, and we conclude our paper in Section 7.
2. Domain Characterization
Bridge maintenance workflow is a process of deciding
the severity, trending, relevance, and benefits of mainte-
nance work on a specific bridge as well as a network of
bridges. According to AASHTO’s asset management guide-
lines [AAS03], the first step in this process is to gather rele-
vant data about a particular bridge, including its known dam-
ages, previous maintenance histories, and typical deteriora-
tion patterns. Bridge managers will then start analyzing the
obtained information, identifying the needs for maintenance
and coming up with proper maintenance plans.
According to bridge managers from NCDOT, it is fairly
common for a bridge manager to be responsible for hun-
dreds of bridges. Since federal guideline dictates that bridges
are inspected on a biennially basis, approximately 50% of
the bridges are inspected in a given year. However, in that
same year, only a portion of the bridges, approximately
20% - 25%, would require any maintenance attention. Even
fewer bridges (around 10%) may actually receive mainte-
nance work. Given the complexity of these inspection re-
sults, compounded with external constraints on budget and
resources, a bridge manager needs to have complete under-
standing of all bridges under his jurisdiction when making
maintenance decisions.
It is therefore necessary to have a BMS that monitors and
analyzes the conditions of bridges in a way that allows a
bridge manager to maintain an overview of all bridges and
yet retain the capability to inspect detailed information of a
particular bridge. Currently, there are a few available BMSs
such as Pontis [WR03] and BRIDGIT [Haw98] that promise
analytical capabilities. However, there exist many limita-
tions and issues with these BMSs (some of which will be
described in detail in the following section), many bridge
managers, including a few from NCDOT, still rely on using
simple spreadsheets such as Microsoft Excel to perform their
analyses.
3. Identifying the Limits in Current BMSs
Together with USDOT, we conduced a nation-wide survey
to analyze the current usage of BMSs [CRR09]. Our sur-
vey focused on collecting information about the utilization
of BMS in each state, and asked for feedback on the utilities
of those systems. As listed in the following table, our survey
was centered around these three substantive questions:
1 What do you see as the most important next step in the
further development of your agency’s BMS ?
2 What do you see as the necessity of expanding current
BMSs?
3 What are the biggest barriers in your department in im-
plementing innovations that may strengthen your BMS?
Table 1: The three substantive questions for all the state
DOTs in the U.S.
Of the 50 state DOTs that we contacted, 35 of them re-
sponded. The result of the survey indicates that while the
BMSs used at these state DOTs are very efficient at data stor-
age, they are not as effective in providing data exploration
or domain-specific data analysis. Based on the response of
these state DOTs, we categorize the limitations of existing
BMSs into three major areas:
• BMSs have not provided effective support for bridge
managers’ decision-making processes. Many states
have reported that they mainly utilize BMSs as data stor-
age software. Although some BMSs have certain auto-
matic decision making support capability [WR03], their
analysis tools are not appropriate or adequate to be incor-
porated in to a bridge manager’s analysis process.
• BMSs are rigid in structure and cannot be easily
adapted to support individual bridge manager’s task
routines. Many states have reported that it is difficult for
them to customize BMSs to suite their own analytical ap-
proaches. These states have also indicated that it is very
difficult for them to implement additional features within
these BMSs.
• BMSs have not provided abilities to incorporate local
inspection technologies. Many states have their own in-
spections results that are complementary to the national
standard inspections. However, as reported by state DOTs,
it is often difficult to import such information into the data
structure that these BMSs provide.
In summary, almost all state DOTs have expressed the
need of having a BMS that enables them to be more effective
at analyzing their bridges. Additionally, they have helped us
identify their domain problems and encouraged us to design
a system that can assist their decision-making processes.
4. Characterizing the domain problems
As indicated by the result of the survey, there are three chal-
lenges in existing BMSs: the insufficient support for analyt-
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
4 Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management
ical processes, the restrictions in personalizing analysis rou-
tines, and the difficulties in integrating heterogenous data.
Therefore, the primary goal of our system is to address these
challenges in accordance to the needs of the bridge man-
agers at these state DOTs. The detailed characterization of
these three challenges, as well as how they are addressed in
our system are described in the following sections.
4.1. Providing effective support for bridge manager’s
decision-making processes
As the state DOTs noted, current BMSs are effective at stor-
ing data, but are insufficient at supporting analysis processes.
In order to address this shortcoming and to provide support
for bridge analysis, we worked with bridge managers at NC-
DOT to identify three analyses that are often essential to
their decision-making process: structural analysis, temporal
analysis, and geospatial analysis. According to these bridge
managers, these analyses help them analyze bridge data from
different perspectives and are integral to their daily work-
flows.
• Dynamic Geospatial Analysis: Bridges exist in a dy-
namic environment with changing surroundings. There-
fore, rather than using a static map, bridge managers of-
ten need to adapt to new situations and analyze bridges
with additional information such as traffic patterns, flood-
ing regions, and population densities. According to bridge
managers, supporting dynamic geo-exploration is a pri-
mary area for bridge analysis.
• High Dimensional Structural Analysis: Typically, the
data representing bridge structures are high in dimen-
sionality. Federal regulation requires bridge inspection to
record nearly 130 structural variables biennially. Given
the complexity of the data, a tool that could assist bridge
managers’ comprehension of these variables would be es-
sential. Specifically, on a high level, bridge managers need
to detect and identify causal relationships and trends in
these variables so that they could identify phenomenons
that are affecting all bridges. On a detailed level when in-
specting a single bridge, bridge managers need to examine
the overall structure integrity of a bridge across multiple
variables and to focus on particular structural components
inside that bridge.
• Scalable Temporal Analysis: Through analyzing the
temporal changes of a bridge’s condition, bridge man-
agers can compute the deterioration rate of the bridge.
In addition, bridge managers can adjust the future main-
tenance plans by assessing the outcomes from previous
work. Therefore, the ability to capture the temporal infor-
mation is of great value to bridge managers when plan-
ning for future maintenances. However, temporal anal-
ysis in most existing BMSs is limited to analysis on a
per bridge basis. Having an overview that could help the
bridge managers spot bridges with abnormal temporal be-
haviors would be very beneficial.
4.2. Supporting individual manager’s task routine
Our survey also suggested that current BMS are quite rigid
in supporting individual bridge manager’s task routines.
As noted in section 2 bridge managers often need to de-
velop their own analysis routines. Depending on available
resources, a bridge manager’s strategy can be very differ-
ent from his peers’, and would require a different combi-
nation of the above analysis processes. In addition, some-
times even the same manager need to take alternative ana-
lytical approaches due to changes in priorities. At the heart
of these individual routines are the different combinations
and sequences of the above analytical processes. Therefore,
it is rather important for a system to provide bridge managers
with the flexibility to combine and sequence these analytical
processes to fit their own workflows.
4.3. Supporting integration of local inspection
technologies
While this is an important issue for the bridge managers,
solving it begins with designing new data structures for the
BMS. Currently, given the rigid nature of existing BMSs,
supporting data integration would require an overhaul of the
designs of these BMSs. We have begun discussions with
AASHTO to improve the capabilities of BMSs in provid-
ing such integrations, but it is outside of the scope of this
project.
5. The Visual Analytics System
Based on the requests of state DOTs as described above,
we design an interactive visual analytics system (Figure 1)
that supports a bridge manager’s decision-making process
and remains customizable to fit an individual manager’s task
routine. The design of our system is based on coordinated
multiple views (CMV) [Rob07], as well as a modular soft-
ware architecture that supports customization of the system
depending on the bridge manager’s preference.
5.1. Supporting Decision-Making Process through
Multiple Coordinated Visualization
In order to provide bridge managers with analytical capa-
bility, our system encodes the three analyses processes de-
scribed in the previous section into a set of coordinated vi-
sualizations. In the following sections, we describe how each
process is depicted in our system.
5.1.1. High Dimensional Structural Analysis
Our system includes three views for helping bridge man-
agers to analyze bridge structures on both a high-level
overview and a low-level detail view. On the high level, our
system utilizes both a parallel coordinate view (PCView,see
Figure 1 (A)) [Mol05] and a scatter plot view (SPView see
Figure 1 (B)) [Tuf90] to help bridge managers detect and
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management 5
identify causal relationships and trends in the data variables.
The nature of parallel coordinates limits the number of di-
mensions that can be effectively displayed at a time. Our im-
plementation therefore provides control panels to allow the
user to select the dimensions of interest (Figure 1 (D)). Us-
ing this view, bridge managers can find correlations in the
bridges’ attributes.
On the other hand, the SP view is designed to depict re-
lationships between bridges across two specific dimensions.
The spatial layout of the view allows the user to see clus-
ters and clearly identify outliers, and is a slightly more in-
tuitive interface than the potentially complex PC view. In
addition, given the importance of time in bridge analysis,
our system also extends the ability to see temporal changes
in both views. Similar to the trails and animation used by
Robertson et al [RFF?08], both SPView and PCView allow
the user to explore the time dimension, which in turn allows
bridge managers to interactively explore and compare infor-
mation from different inspection cycle. Together, these two
visualizations give bridge managers the ability to see high-
level trends and patterns in the data’s variables.
Figure 2: The Detail View for Bridge (A) An interactive
Bridge Schematic Diagram; (B) A Line graph for monitor-
ing temporal changes for major bridge structures; (C) Im-
age Analysis Results for cracks on pavements, the Pavement
is shown on the left; (D) Inspection Imageries that suggests
the structural damage of the supporting piles of this bridge.
On a detailed level, when inspecting a single bridge,
bridge managers need to examine both the overall struc-
tural integrity of a bridge across multiple variables, as well
as focusing on particular structural components inside that
bridge. Therefore, we design a structural detail view to auto-
matically link information between each bridge component
and provide bridge managers with an intuitive visualization
to interactively analyze the corresponding structural infor-
mation.
Based on existing bridge design guidelines [DET06], we
model general bridge components into an interactive bridge
schematic diagram (see Figure 2 (A)). In this diagram,
bridge managers can directly select the major bridge struc-
tures, and analyze each component individually. In addi-
tion, a line graph enables bridge managers to monitor tem-
poral changes for individual bridge structures. Associated
with overall temporal information presented in the small
multiples view, this structural temporal component helps
bridge managers to gain insight into the affects of struc-
tural changes, and to efficiently identify the key factors in
the overall deteriorations.
5.1.2. Small Multiples For Temporal Analysis
Bridge managers have expressed the need of having a tool
to help them analyze the temporal changes of bridge data.
They want to be able to perform analysis over time on a
large number of bridges as well as one bridge at a time.
Thus, we design a small multiples view [Tuf90] to help
them achieve temporal analysis of large number of bridges.
Our design is based on small multiples views in the litera-
ture [RFF?08, KERC09] - similar to the work by Robertson
et al [RFF?08], our small multiples view shows deterioration
changes of each bridge using trend lines.
Figure 3: The Small Multiples view with Squarified Treemap
layout. Bridges are grouped by their main structure types.
For each cell, the x axis represents different inspection cy-
cles and the y axis represents the structural attribute values
selected by the user.
As shown in Figure 3, each cell in this view represents
a single bridge, while the inside line graph represents the
bridge’s overall rating in all inspection cycles. These cells
are further sorted based on the standard deviations of the y
axes in the line graph to determine the color of the cells,
with warmer color representing sharper changes over time.
We note that in this approach, bridges with either downward
and upward trending in structural attributes will be colored
with warmer colors.
Additionally, since it is often necessary for bridge man-
agers to understand the temporal patterns for a certain group
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
6 Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management
of bridges, we applied a customizable Treemap [BHW00]
spatial layout to group the small multiples based on partic-
ular structures. For example, figure 3 shows the bridges di-
vided based on their construction material (note the black
lines separating regions of the treemap). In this example, the
layout enables bridge managers to discover the uncommon
temporal pattern where several recently built, known-to-last,
concrete structure bridges show significant deterioration. It
is therefore mentioned by bridge managers that the capa-
bility in finding such insight is not only valuable for their
maintenance decisions, but also can help optimize their fu-
ture construction planning.
5.1.3. Geospatial Analysis
Extensive research on geospatial visualization [AAR?09,
BDW?08,TG02] have shown the benefits of utilizing online
map systems such as Google Maps and Microsoft Virtual
Earth. Similar to work by Fisher et al. [Fis07], we also utilize
Microsoft Virtual Earth (MSVE [Mic09]) to provide bridge
managers with dynamic and interactive geospatial analysis
(see Figure 1 (C)). By placing the bridges onto the scalable
map, detailed geographic relationships and patterns immedi-
ately become apparent.
By adopting online map systems such as MSVE, our sys-
tem can have the most up-to-date geospatial information
such as road structures and 3D building models. However,
we further extended MSVE in our system to overlay large
amounts of (proprietary) geo-coordinated information over
the map, such as traffic distribution patterns and satellite im-
ages, and can utilize that information to perform extensive
geospatial analysis.
5.2. Supporting Customization of the System
To adapt to the development of emerging domain technolo-
gies, our system is built on top of a modular architecture
that allows bridge managers to extend the system to incor-
porate advanced visualizations and more effective data mod-
els. This is made possible largely because inspections and
analysis results are tightly associated using a unique bridge
identification number.
Therefore, each visualization component integrated in our
current system is designed to be interchangeable with other
equivalent visualizations if they both use the bridge identifi-
cation numbers. Using our architecture, if bridge managers
suggest new suitable visualizations for their analysis, our
system would be ready to incorporate those visualizations
to provide additional functionalities.
Furthermore, this approach enables bridge managers to
combine the traditional National Bridge Inspection Stan-
dards (NBIS) dataset with their locally collected informa-
tion. As of the paper, we have helped NCDOT bridge man-
agers to associate bridge structural information with exten-
sive data collected in the North Carolina region. This ex-
tensive information includes, as shown in Figure 1 (F), field
inspections imageries, LIDAR scans for each structure, and
pavement crack analysis results.
6. Example Scenario
Figure 4: (A) A significant downward temporal trending in-
dicates an unusual pattern (B) Using PCView to compare
different structural attributes (C) Examining certain bridge
on SPView, indicating this is the earliest constructed bridge
in the database (D) The Geospatial view shows that this
bridge is constructed on top of a river stream.
Identifying and understanding the cause of bridge deteri-
oration is a key step for bridge managers to come up with
corresponding maintenance strategies. It has been observed
that there are generally three stages in achieving this step,
namely, selecting bridge candidates, detailed examination,
and identifying potential causes for damage. The following
scenario was identified together with Charlotte DOT’s bridge
management team for their annual bridge maintenance plan-
ning.
Our system was initialized with data from previous
three inspection cycles: years 2000, 2004, and 2006. The
bridge management team started the maintenance process
by searching for bridges with significant changes in suffi-
ciency rating in the previous years. They utilized the small
multiples view to see if any interesting bridge changing pat-
terns could be identified. As shown in Figure 1 (E), the team
found a set of bridges with warmer colors in the small mul-
tiples view, and they also identified several bridges with sig-
nificant downward trends in the past years. By highlighting
these bridges in the scatter plot view (see Figure 4 (C)), the
team noticed that one of them was actually the oldest bridge
in the Charlotte area. Suggested by both the small multiple
view and the scatter plot view, this bridge actually shared the
lowest overall rating in that year and had had drastic deteri-
orations since 2004.
To have a closer look at the bridge, the team used our
geospatial view and zoomed into the bridge to check its
surrounding environments. As shown in Figure 4 (D), this
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management 7
bridge was constructed over a river stream, and had sup-
ported high traffic volume because it had been chosen as
a part of a detour route for a major interstate highway.
These findings immediately raised several questions: could
the bridge’s deterioration be caused by water erosion, over-
loaded traffic, or flood damage? Although these were all pos-
sible causes of the deterioration, bridge managers had no
definitive answers to confirm these hypotheses by looking
at the geospatial view alone.
Trying to verify their hypotheses, the management team
started to find clues from the structural reports of that bridge.
By plotting the corresponding criteria in the parallel co-
ordinate view, they found that the traffic amount on that
bridge had not changed significantly in the previous years,
and therefore ruled out the possibility of traffic pattern be-
ing the cause of the deterioration. However, the PC view
showed that the water adequacy rating had dropped signifi-
cantly during the past two inspections, suggesting the bridge
had undergone severe water damage. To extract more detail,
the team brought up the bridge’s detailed structural view. As
shown in Figure 2 (D), the supporting pillar for this bridge
had shown heavy warping, and the bridge showed clear
marks of water erosion near the bottom of the pillar. A quick
reference check on the county’s flood history confirmed that
three significant flooding took place in years 2003, 2005, and
2006 around that area, which gave the bridge managers sig-
nificant reasons to conclude that water damage, especially
flooding, was a key factor in causing the deterioration of this
bridge.
Given the poor condition of its supporting structure, the
bridge managers concluded that this bridge definitely needed
maintenance attention. After the exercise, the management
team commended the effectiveness of our system in assisting
the identification of the deficient bridge, as well as the cause
of the deterioration. Although simple, this scenario demon-
strates a successful application of our tool in a real-world
analysis application.
7. Expert Evaluation
In this section, we report the feedback from evaluations con-
ducted with bridge managers at both NCDOT and City of
Charlotte DOT (CDOT). Our evaluations were conducted by
first demonstrating the design of the system and the utilities
of each visualization. Then, we invited bridge managers to
perform in-depth analyses using the system. Although the
degree and depth of analyses differed in each evaluation ses-
sion, the bridge managers generally agreed that our system
provided more analytical capability than any existing BMSs,
and that it is flexible enough for them to quickly incorporate
the use of our system into their daily routine.
7.1. Visual facilitation of decision-making processes
One benefit of our system that was noted by all bridge man-
agers was that it provided a visual exploration environment
to help them analyze information from multiple aspects. The
capability of being able to perform not only geo-temporal
analysis, but also structural analysis was of great value to
bridge managers’ decision-making process. One of the man-
agers commented that, “[the] linked visualizations provide
me with a cohesive understanding about the data that I am
working on. It reduces the time I spent on manually search-
ing for information, and helps me focus more on the task
itself.”
As demonstrated in the scenario (see section 6), our sys-
tem helped bridge managers to effectively analyze their data
across multiple dimensions and assist them in determining
the cause of deterioration. All the bridge managers found
the system practical, and believed that the system would be
valuable in their daily routines. One of the managers from
NCDOT noted that, “...using your system, I can see correla-
tions that I normally wouldn’t be able to see. This is much
easier than making the similar observation from using our
current system.”
In particular, many bridges managers pointed out that the
temporal analysis in our system provided them with the
capability to effectively monitor changes in bridge condi-
tions and identify maintenance candidates. In addition, many
bridge managers noted that the capability to examine bridge
structures from multiple levels (overview and detailed view)
could effectively guide them from examining large amounts
of data to inspecting bridges one at a time.
In summary, one bridge manager from USDOT com-
mented that, “...using your system, we can now see what
we normally can’t see. We also could have a cohesive un-
derstanding about our bridge assets. This would be helpful
for us to identify and prioritize bridges...”. This confirms the
utilities of our system.
7.2. The flexibility to assist individual workflow
At the heart of our system is a modular software architec-
ture. This design provides bridge managers with the flexibil-
ity to customize system, and allows them to only utilize the
necessary visualizations in their practices. As pointed out by
a manager from CDOT, “[your system] will greatly shorten
the catch-up time between my learning to use the system and
my actual use of it.”
Additionally, this modular design also allows our system
to keep up with the development of the bridge inspection
technologies. We are currently working with NCDOT to in-
tegrate their extensive inspection data into the system and
customize the system for their needs. According to a bridge
manager from USDOT, “true to the goal of the project, this
system allows us to think about how we could have more
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
8 Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management
practical impacts with integration of other technologies. As
such, it gives us an opportunity to deploy the system to other
state DOTs”.
8. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the current limitations of our sys-
tem and future research directions.
8.1. Visualizations to Facilitate the Prioritization
Process
While data analysis using our system can assist bridge man-
agers in identifying candidate bridges that are structurally
deficient, finding these bridges is just the first step in achiev-
ing overall maintenance decisions. There is an important pri-
oritization process to decide which bridge actually receives
maintenance that takes place after the candidates have been
identified . As noted in section 2, this prioritization process is
necessary due to limited resources such as budget and con-
struction timings. Due to such constraints, bridge manager
often need to find a balance between limited resources and
maintenance requirements to maximize the overall stability
of the transportation system as well as the safety of the pub-
lic.
Unfortunately, such an optimization process is often not
well defined, and the maintenance decisions vary depend-
ing on the goal of individual bridge managers. For example,
some managers may focus on repairing supporting structures
of bridges, which they believe is crucial to the bridges’ struc-
tural integrity, while others may spend the resources on fix-
ing the bridge deck where visible damages occur. Although
there are always uncertainties and variations in this process,
it is clear that bridge managers need to have adequate strate-
gies and tools to help them find the most optimal solution.
Our current system mainly focuses on providing data
analysis, but not prioritization. According to bridge man-
agers, it would be quite useful to extend our system’s ability
to support both stages and help them optimize maintenance
decisions. We have started discussing the possibility of ex-
tending our system with bridge managers, and the design of
a constraint-based interactive visual analytics system would
be one interesting future direction of our project.
8.2. Externalize the bridge manager’s domain
knowledge
Analysis of high-dimensional bridge data is generally per-
formed by bridge managers who have a great deal of ex-
perience and special training, both of which are valuable
domain knowledge. It is therefore interesting to consider
whether externalizing such domain knowledge and reap-
plying it into customized visualizations would be feasi-
ble for enhancing bridge maintenance decisions. Although
there is no definitive way to achieve complete knowledge
transfer, existing research has that have demonstrated how
to incorporate visualization with domain specific knowl-
edge [XGH06,GNRM08]. To achieve similar knowledge ex-
ternalization, we propose a tight integration of the visualiza-
tion with an ontological knowledge structure that could in-
teractively capture and store the user’s interactions and trans-
late them into domain knowledge [WJD?09]. This external-
ization could further be used in training new managers, com-
municating with others, and reporting decisions.
8.3. Combine decision-making model with visual
analytics system
Although our system has been very well received by DOTs
of all levels, there have been some discussions in using auto-
mated analysis tool versus explorative visual analytical tool.
In bridge management, existing BMSs such as Pontis in-
clude automated method like Markov models to predict the
rate of bridge deterioration. While most bridge managers
have rejected such methods because of concerns with accu-
racy, some bridge managers have also raised the question of
how repeatable and reliable interactive visual analytics sys-
tem can be given the subjective nature of open exploration.
We acknowledge that the challenge of making explo-
rations in visual analytical systems is an important one for
the entire visualization community. However, in the context
of bridge management, we propose that the solution is likely
an integration of interactive techniques with automated ones.
The challenge of such integration are the roles and relation-
ships between the two components. At this point we do not
have a clear outline on how to accomplish such integration
that would leverage the strengths of both methods, but this
challenge is an important one that we will look to address in
the near future.
9. Related Work
US and state DOTs have had a long history of adopting
visualizations. As summarized in a recent survey by R.G.
Hughes [Hug08], transportation visualizations can be gener-
ally categorized into two groups: (1) 3D visualizations that
support design simulation and planning and (2) geographic
information visualization that helps with data analysis and
managing.
There is an extensive literature devoted to the use of visu-
alization to support transportation simulation and planning.
For example, both VISSIM [Vis08] and CORSIM [Uni06]
are widely used to visualize traffic simulations and micro-
scopic traffic controls. Also, 3D visualizations have been
adopted to depict transportation designs and maintenance
processes, such as NC3D [New09], a 3D visualization tool
for designing high-speed railroads.
The field of geospatial visualization is a well-established
area of research, especially in the field of Geographical In-
formation Systems (GIS). Commercial GIS systems have
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management 9
also been developed to specifically help depict transporta-
tion data, such as GeoTrAMS [Int05], which is designed
to manage train and rail assets, and TransCAD [Cap09],
which focuses on road management. In visualization com-
munity, there are also extensive research on geospatial anal-
ysis. In addition to the systems we have referenced in sec-
tion 5, examples for geospatial research also include Geo-
Vista by Takatsuka et al. [TG02] and GeoTime by Kapler et
al. [KW04].
On the other hand, the use of visualization to perform
bridge data analysis and bridge management is still in a pre-
liminary stage. Although some simulation-based highway
management systems have been developed [PTSR98], the
main focus in this line of research is on depicting and ex-
tending knowledge of the geospatial nature in transportation
information. Another notable analytical tool that partially in-
cludes bridge analysis is the work by Wongsuphssawat et
al. [WPF?09] which performs data analysis of federal high-
way incidents. While both of these system concentrate on
analyzing transpiration information, our system focuses on
the interactive exploration and analysis of the relationships
within the bridge data.
10. Conclusion
Maintaining bridges is a multi-faceted operation that re-
quires both domain knowledge and analytics techniques over
large data sources. Although current bridge management
systems are very efficient at data storage, they are not as ef-
fective at providing analytical capabilities. In this paper, we
present our interactive visual analytics system that extends
the capabilities of current BMSs. As shown in Figure 1,
our system was designed in collaboration with bridge man-
agers in national, state, and local DOTs, and has been im-
plemented specifically to provide them with interactive data
exploration, cohesive information correlation and domain-
oriented data analyses. Our system enables bridge man-
agers to customize the visualization and data model to fit
each individual’s task routines. In our expert evaluations,
bridge managers expressed their interest in using our analy-
sis system and confirmed its novelty and utility over existing
BMSs. With such encouraging feedbacks from domain ex-
perts, we are planning to deploy our system to multiple state
DOTs and put our system in to real-world environments.
References
[AAR?09] ANDRIENKO G., ANDRIENKO N., RINZIVILLO S.,
NANNI M., PEDRESCHI D., GIANNOTTI F.: Interactive visual
clustering of large collections of trajectories. In Visual Analytics
Science and Technology, 2009. VAST 2009. IEEE Symposium on
(Oct. 2009), pp. 3–10. 6
[AAS03] AASHTO: Transportation Asset Management Guide.
Tech. rep., NCHRP Project 20-24, January 2003. 3
[Ame09] AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS: 2009 re-
port card for america’s infrastructure on bridges, 2009. 1
[BDW?08] BUTKIEWICZ T., DOU W., WARTELL Z., RIB-
ARSKY W., CHANG R.: Multi-focused geospatial analysis using
probes. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transac-
tions on 14, 6 (Nov.-Dec. 2008), 1165–1172. 6
[BHW00] BRULS M., HUIZING K., WIJK J. J. V.: Squarified
treemaps. In In Proceedings of the Joint Eurographics and IEEE
TCVG Symposium on Visualization (2000), Eindhoven Univer-
sity of Technology, Press, pp. 33–42. 6
[Bri93] BRINCKERHOFF PARSONS; SILANO L. G. (Ed.): Bridge
inspection and rehabilitation: a practical guide. John Wiley and
Sons, 1993. 1
[Cap09] CAPLIPER CORPORATION: TransCAD, a transportation
planning software. Tech. rep., Capliper Corporation, 2009. 9
[CRR09] COREY RICE XIAOYU WANG R. C., RIBARSKY W.:
A survey about the current usage of BMSs across the U.S. Tech.
rep., Univeristy of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2009. 2, 3
[DET06] DEMETRIOS E. TONIAS J. J. Z.: Bridge engineering.
McGraw Hill, 2006. 1, 5
[Fis07] FISHER D.: Hotmap: Looking at geographic attention.
Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on 13,
6 (Nov.-Dec. 2007), 1184–1191. 6
[GNRM08] GARG S., NAM J., RAMAKRISHNAN I., MUELLER
K.: Model-driven visual analytics. In Visual Analytics Sci-
ence and Technology, 2008. VAST ’08. IEEE Symposium on (Oct.
2008), pp. 19–26. 8
[Haw98] HAWK HUGH; SMALL E. P.: The bridgit bridge man-
agement system. Structural Engineering International Volume 8
(1998), 309–314. 3
[Hea07] HEARN G.: Bridge Inspection Practices. Tech. rep., Uni-
versity of Colorado, Boulder, 2007. 1
[Hug08] HUGHES R. G.: Research agenda for visualization
in transportation. In SIGGRAPH ’08: ACM SIGGRAPH 2008
classes (New York, NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 1–5. 8
[Int05] INTERGRAPH CORPORATION: Geographisches Trans-
port Anlagen Management System. Tech. rep., Intergraph Cor-
poration, 2005. 9
[KERC09] KEEFE D., EWERT M., RIBARSKY W., CHANG R.:
Interactive coordinated multiple-view visualization of biome-
chanical motion data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 15, 6 (2009), 1383–1390. 5
[KW04] KAPLER T., WRIGHT W.: Geotime information visual-
ization. In INFOVIS ’04: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (Washington, DC, USA, 2004), IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 25–32. 9
[Mic09] MICROSOFT CORPORATION: Mircrosoft Virtual Earth.
Tech. rep., Microsoft Corporation, 2009. 6
[Mol05] MOLLER T.: A parallel coordinates style interface for
exploratory volume visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics 11, 1 (2005), 71–80. 4
[MRG?01] MOORE M., ROLANDER D., GRAYBEAL B.,
PHARES B., WASHER G.: Highway bridge inspection: State-
of-the-practice survey. Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board 1749 (2001), 73–81. 1
[New09] NEWLANDS COMPANY: NC3D, Transportation and
Urban Design System. Tech. rep., Newlands Company, 2009.
8
[PTSR98] PLAISANT C., TARNOFF P., SARAF A., ROSE A.:
Understanding transportation management systems performance
with a simulation-based learning environment. Tech. rep., Pro-
ceedings of ITS’99, Annual Meeting of the Intelligent Transpo-
ration Society of America, 1998. 9
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)
10 Submission # 326 / An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Management
[RFF?08] ROBERTSON G., FERNANDEZ R., FISHER D., LEE
B., STASKO J.: Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14,
6 (2008), 1325–1332. 5
[Rob07] ROBERTS J. C.: State of the art: Coordinated and mul-
tiple views in exploratory visualization. In Fifth International
Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization (2007), pp. 61–71. 4
[TG02] TAKATSUKA M., GAHEGAN M.: Geovista studio: a
codeless visual programming environment for geoscientific data
analysis and visualization. Comput. Geosci. 28, 10 (December
2002), 1131–1144. 6, 9
[Tuf90] TUFTE E. R.: Envisioning Information. Graphics Press,
May 1990. 4, 5
[Uni06] UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA MCTRANS CENTER: Mc-
Trans, a transportation planning software. Tech. rep., University
of Florida McTrans Center, 2006. 8
[Vis08] VISUAL SOLUTIONS INC.: VisSim, a block diagram lan-
guage for creating complex nonlinear dynamic systems. Tech.
rep., Visual Solutions Inc., 2008. 8
[Wes04] WESEMAN W. A.: Recording and Coding Guide for the
Structure Inventory and Appraisal of the Nations Bridges. Tech.
rep., Federal Highway Administration, 2004. 1
[WJD?09] WANG X., JEONG D. H., DOU W., LEE S.-W., RIB-
ARSKY W., CHANG R.: Knowledge assisted visualization:
Defining and applying knowledge conversion processes to a vi-
sual analytics system. Comput. Graph. 33, 5 (2009), 616–623.
8
[WPF?09] WONGSUPHASAWAT K., PACK M., FILIPPOVA D.,
VANDANIKER M., OLEA A.: Visual analytics for transporta-
tion incident datasets. TRB 88th Annual Meeting Compendium
of Papers DVD (2009). 9
[WR03] W ROBERT A MARSHALL R. S.: Pontis bridge man-
agement system: state of the practice in implementation and de-
velopment. In 9th International Bridge Management Conference
(Jan 01, 2003). 3
[XGH06] XIAO L., GERTH J., HANRAHAN P.: Enhancing visual
analysis of network traffic using a knowledge representation. In
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2008. VAST ’08. IEEE
Symposium on (31 2006-Nov. 2 2006), pp. 107–114. 8
submitted to Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization (2010)

