 Astrojumper: Motivating Exercise with an 
Immersive Virtual Reality Exergame 
 
S. Finkelstein, A. Nickel, Z. Lipps, Z. Wartell, T. Barnes, E. Suma 
 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 20(1), 78-92. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 This article must be cited as: 
 
Finkelstein, S.; Nickel, A.; Lipps, Z.; Barnes, T.; Wartell, Z. & Suma, E. A. (2011), 
'Astrojumper: Motivating Exercise with an Immersive Virtual Reality Exergame', 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 20(1), 78-92. 
 
 Copyright: 2011 Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
 
 Journal Home Page: http://www.mitpressjournals.org/loi/pres  
 
 Bibtex Citation: 
 
@ARTICLE{Finkelstein2011, 
  author = {Finkelstein, Samantha and Nickel, Andrea and Lipps, Zachary and Barnes, 
 Tiffany and Wartell, Zachary and Suma, Evan A.}, 
  title = {Astrojumper: Motivating Exercise with an Immersive Virtual Reality 
 Exergame}, 
  journal = {Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments}, 
  year = {2011}, 
  volume = {20}, 
  pages = {78-92}, 
  number = {1}, 
  doi = {10.1162/pres_a_00036}, 
  eprint = {http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/pres_a_00036}, 
  owner = {zwartell}, 
  timestamp = {2011.06.21}, 
  url = {http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/pres_a_00036}} 
 
Samantha Finkelstein*
Andrea Nickel
Zachary Lipps
Tiffany Barnes
Zachary Wartell
University of North Carolina
at Charlotte
Department of Computer Science
Charlotte, North Carolina 28223
Evan A. Suma
Institute for Creative Technologies
University of Southern California
Pasadena, California
Presence, Vol. 20, No. 1, February 2011, 78–92
© 2011 by The Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Astrojumper: Motivating Exercise
with an Immersive Virtual Reality
Exergame
Abstract
We present the design and evaluation of Astrojumper, an immersive virtual reality
exergame developed to motivate players to engage in rigorous, full-body exercise.
We performed a user study with 30 people between the ages of 6 and 50 who
played the game for 15 min. Regardless of differences in age, gender, activity level,
and video game experience, participants rated Astrojumper extremely positively and
experienced a significant increase in heart rate after gameplay. Additionally, we found
that participants’ ratings of perceived workout intensity positively correlated with
their level of motivation. Overall, our results demonstrate that Astrojumper effec-
tively motivates both children and adults to exercise through immersive virtual reality
technology and a simple, yet engaging, game design.
1 Introduction
The use of video games in physical exercise, known as exergaming, has
been increasing in attention and popularity in recent years (Sinclair, Hingston,
& Masek, 2007). The release of commodity motion sensing devices, most
notably the Nintendo Wii remote and Wii Fit balance board, has resulted in
a large number of video games that use body motion as a game mechanic.
While video games can be effective motivators, we believe that using immer-
sive, stereoscopic virtual reality (VR) will provide an even greater incentive
for physical activity. To this end, we developed Astrojumper, a virtual reality
exergame that was designed to study the benefits of stereoscopy and immersion
for motivating physical exercise in both children and adults (see Figure 1).
The input devices used with commodity gaming platforms (e.g., balance
boards, dance pads, and accelerometer-based controllers) are generally not
capable of sensing motions with six DOF, which makes it difficult to measure
whether a game engages the user’s entire body, including the head, torso, and
limbs, in physical activity. Locomotion interfaces such as bicycles have also been
used for exercise games (Mokka, Väätänen, Heinilä, & Välkkynen, 2003), but
the interactions that can be performed with these devices are limited. In con-
trast to these interfaces, Astrojumper tracks the user’s head, torso, and arms
in 3D space, which allows us to support full-body activities such as dodging,
ducking under, jumping over, and grabbing virtual stimuli.
*Correspondence to sfinkel1@uncc.edu.
78 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
Finkelstein et al. 79
Figure 1. A user playing Astrojumper in our three-wall stereoscopic
projected display. Gameplay requires rapid body movements to dodge
planets and collect bonuses. During a UFO attack, the player can
execute quick arm motions to throw green laser beams at the enemy
spacecraft.
As quickly as new input devices are created to facilitate
exercise in games, players discover ways to win without
actually exercising. For example, while the Nintendo
Wii allows players to engage in realistic motions such
as swinging a tennis racket, it does not require accu-
rate and realistic behavior, as frustrated players observe
when they are beat by an opponent moving only their
wrists while sitting on the couch. One way to prevent
players from finding workarounds is to immerse them
in virtual reality and tie game performance to actual,
full-body activity. Astrojumper was designed and devel-
oped so that players must move not only their feet and
legs, but must also engage their upper body to win the
game. This is a key component to all games with a sec-
ondary purpose: the purpose must be central to the core
game mechanic, in other words, the activity that play-
ers engage in more than any other. Balancing a game’s
purpose with fun is challenging, requiring game design-
ers to focus on how to achieve gameflow while engaging
players in the main purpose of the game. Astrojumper
achieves this balance by requiring full-body motion
to play, which encourages exercise, while adapting the
game to player performance, becoming more challeng-
ing as players excel or slowing down as players make
mistakes.
In this paper, we report on a user study that was
conducted to evaluate Astrojumper’s effectiveness in
motivating players to exercise. In addition to inves-
tigating whether Astrojumper is fun and effective in
promoting exercise, we also intended to gather feedback
for the design of immersive exergames. While the aver-
age gamer does not yet have access to a virtual reality
setup at home, recent technological advances may make
this possible in the near future. For example, monitors,
plasma displays, and projectors with refresh rates over
120Hz are now available and can be combined with
the NVIDIA 3D vision kit to provide stereoscopic 3D
gaming on a desktop PC. Furthermore, the success of
the Nintendo Wii has spurred innovation for commod-
ity motion sensing devices across a variety of platforms.
Given the increasing accessibility of immersive technol-
ogy, we believe that it is important to study the benefits
of using virtual reality for emerging applications such as
exergaming.
2 Related Work
Though exergaming has seen a recent increase
in popularity, few guidelines have been developed for
the design of these applications. Furthermore, several
evaluations of previously developed games have cited
problems in finding the balance between engaging
gameplay and appropriate levels of physical exertion.
For example, Kick Ass Kung-Fu is a fitness game that
was designed to engage adults involved in martial arts
(Hämäläinen, Ilmonen, Höysniemi, Lindholm, & Nykä-
nen, 2005). Participants were able to use their physical
actions to move an avatar on a large projection display to
fight virtual competitors. While the results of this study
indicated that the game was effective for motivating
martial arts and acrobatics training, users complained
that the game design limited how they were able to
interact with the system, and that they were not able
to perform the moves they wanted. Luke et al. evalu-
ated the Sony EyeToy, a full-body exertion interface,
to analyze energy expenditure in a variety of exercise
games (Luke, Coles, Anderson, & Gilbert, 2005). While
he found that this system was engaging, he concluded
80 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
that the system’s effectiveness was limited due to only
small bursts of exercise followed by long pauses that did
not allow the player’s heart rate to build. Similarly, in
a personal analysis of three video game exertion inter-
faces, Smith found similar problems with the Cateye
GameBike, and noted that he was unable to main-
tain his target heart rate due to the long load times
between races (Smith, 2005). He also found that he was
unable to get a full workout from just a single game,
and concluded that exergames should consider in-game
warm-ups and cooldowns, as well as dynamic difficulty
adjustment.
Over the past few years, children have been spend-
ing more time engaging in screen-based activities such
as watching television, playing video games, and using
computers, possibly leading to an increase in childhood
obesity (Marshall, Gorely, & Biddle, 2006). Because of
this, exergames designed specifically for young children
have been developed (Höysniemi, Hämäläinen, Turkki,
& Rouvi, 2005; Bekker, van den Hoven, Peters, &
Hemmink, 2007; Yannakakis, Hallam, & Lund, 2006).
Research that evaluates game design specifications for
this population indicate that children enjoy realistic
fantasies and sportlike activities that require physical
dexterity, balance, coordination, and strength (Acuff &
Reiher, 1997). Additionally, work that specifically eval-
uated exergame requirements for children suggested
that these systems should provide robustness, respon-
siveness, intuitiveness, and physical appropriateness to
ensure the children would be able to effectively engage
with the game (Höysniemi et al., 2005). These prin-
ciples have since been put into practice in developed
systems for children, such as in Bug-Smasher, devel-
oped by Yannakakis et al. (2006). Bug-Smasher uses
a 6 × 6 platform with randomly appearing colored
lights to get children to jump around and smash the
presented lights (or bugs). Children found the game
quite enjoyable, and Yannakakis also reported that chil-
dren who were able to project their own fantasies into
the game world had higher levels of enjoyment. Bekker
et al. developed two additional systems based on these
presented game specifications: Flash Poles and Battle
Bots (Bekker et al., 2007). Both of these game systems
were designed to allow for more open-ended exergame
play, with Flash Poles allowing the children to interact
with physical poles that provided light feedback and
Battle Bots allowing the children to control tanks with
their body movements. Early user studies on elemen-
tary school-aged children were performed on both of
these systems, and though no quantitative informa-
tion regarding exerted physical activity was reported,
the children seemed to find the systems both engaging
and effective at promoting social relationships between
active participants. In addition to games employing plat-
forms or physical props, Hoysniemi et al. developed a
computer-vision based game that allows children to
control a 2D dragon, QuiQui, on a screen using var-
ious body movements (Höysniemi et al., 2005). The
experimenters found that most of the movements were
intuitive for the children to perform, and that this was an
important aspect of game play. The authors also suggest
that future exergaming work look into developing sys-
tems that allow for more holistic full-body movements,
such as jumping, which we took into consideration in
the design of Astrojumper.
Research has also been performed to evaluate the
effectiveness of exergames at promoting social relation-
ships, yielding positive results. For example, Mueller
et al. describe three exergames designed to study social
interaction (FlyGuy, Push N’ Pull, and Breakout for
Two), and found that games involving physical activ-
ity augmented social relationships better than traditional
multiplayer computer games (F. Mueller, Agamanolis,
& Picard, 2003; F. F. Mueller, Stevens, Thorogood,
O’Brien, & Wulf, 2007). Additionally, Nautilus is a
cooperative game requiring players to free a virtual
dolphin through physical gestures such as clapping,
stomping, and flapping (Strömberg, Väätänen, & Räty,
2002). However, for these games, few considerations
were given to promoting physical exertion, and instead
focused on engaging cooperative play.
Exercise technology has also been shown to be effec-
tive in rehabilitation and training. Virtual reality exercise
systems have been shown to improve cognitive func-
tion in people with neurological injuries on a variety of
memory and cognition tasks (Grealy, Johnson, & Rush-
ton, 1999). In two case studies performed by Kizony
et al., virtual reality technology was used to improve
Finkelstein et al. 81
balance and coordination of a patient in a wheelchair
and a patient recovering from a right hemispheric stroke
(Kizony, Katz, & Weiss, 2003). Because these VR sys-
tems are typically quite expensive, research has been
done to examine the effectiveness of low-cost rehabilita-
tion systems. Pilot studies were performed by Rand et al.
in 2004 to compare an expensive VR system to a Sony
Eye Toy (Rand, Kizony, & Weiss, 2004). In healthy
young adults, there was no difference in presence, enjoy-
ment, or motivation between these two systems. In
healthy older adults and older adults recovering from
stroke, the results were unclear, as each of these mea-
sures varied greatly based on the type of game played on
each system. In 2008, these experimenters performed
a similar study, concluding that the Sony Eye Toy may
be an effective low-cost tool to engage patients recov-
ering from a stroke in physical activity (Rand, Kizony,
& Weiss, 2008). The authors note that there are cer-
tain technological limitations in the Eye Toy, such as an
inability to systematically report a user’s performance,
which may make it difficult to use as a therapeutic tool.
Regardless, the authors conclude that the Sony Eye Toy
was easy to operate, was enjoyable, and generated a high
sense of presence, making it effective overall. Morrow
et al. replicated an expensive system for stroke reha-
bilitation using a much more low-cost system as well,
showing that it was possible to create similar applications
with reasonable costs (Morrow, Docan, Burdea, & Meri-
ans, 2003). However, the authors acknowledge their
low-cost system has less functionality than the original,
and suggest that user testing be performed to evaluate
how this decrease in functionality affects the system’s
effectiveness as a rehabilitation tool. In addition to reha-
bilitation, virtual reality has also been used for training
physical movements in virtual environments, such as tai
chi (Chua et al., 2003). While these studies do indicate
that VR is effective for engaging users in physical activ-
ities, they focused primarily on achieving a specific task,
with no emphasis on motivating game design factors.
Overall, in studies that have compared the differences
between VR-aided exercise and nonaided exercise, it has
been shown that VR resulted in less intense physiolog-
ical responses to pain due to extended physical activity
(Chuang et al., 2003). Similar results were also found by
Porcari et al., who evaluated the effects of virtual simula-
tion on exercise motivation and intensity while pedaling
an exercise bike (Porcari, Zedaker, & Maldari, 1998).
The experimenters found that participants who were
provided with a virtual environment had higher heart
rates and burned more calories than the participants
without this virtual simulation. The benefits of virtual
reality exercise even extend to participants’ moods, with
participants who participate in VR-aided exercise being
significantly less tired and showing significantly more
enjoyment than those who engage in standard exercise
(Plante, Aldridge, Bogdan, & Hanelin, 2003). Addition-
ally, previous research suggests that increased immersion
(over less immersive virtual reality) is even more ben-
eficial for enhancing a user’s motivation in exergames.
For example, recent work by IJsselsteijn et al. shows
that when the visual display appears to be more real-
istic and immersion is higher, participants were more
motivated to engage in exercise (IJsselsteijn, Kort, West-
erink, Jager, & Bonants, 2006). These results also show
that spatial presence, engagement, and ecological valid-
ity were also higher for increased immersion. This work
suggests that more immersive virtual environments will
heighten the enjoyment the user is experiencing, and
thus will have a beneficial effect on the user’s motivation
to engage in exercise. Increased immersion can also be
achieved through stereoscopic projection displays, with
a foundation of work indicating that stereoscopy greatly
increases presence (Hendrix & Barfield, 1995) as well as
task performance (Gruchalla, 2005). To the best of our
knowledge, Astrojumper is the first exergame using an
immersive stereoscopic display to be formally evaluated.
Given that many previous exergames may not provide
the optimal balance between engaging gameplay and
physical exertion, it is vital to consider a variety of game-
play factors which may affect the player’s psychological
and physiological responses. To outline the compo-
nents of successful video games, Sweetser and Wyeth
presented the gameflow model, which emphasizes the
importance of the following criteria: concentration,
challenge, player skills, control, clear goals, feedback,
immersion, and social interaction (Sweetser & Wyeth,
2005). Applying this general gameflow model specifi-
cally to the design of exergames, Sinclair et al. suggested
82 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
Figure 2. (a) When playing Astrojumper, the user needs to dodge planets that are speeding toward him or her. (b) The user can accumulate
score multipliers by tapping gold suns that appear periodically.
a dual-flow model that balances the psychological flow
of gameplay (attractiveness) and the physiological
flow of exercise (effectiveness) (Sinclair et al., 2007).
Putting these models into practice, we carefully con-
sidered Sweetser’s gameflow criteria during the design
of Astrojumper. Additionally, to balance the dual flow
of gameplay, Astrojumper adjusts the difficulty level
dynamically based on the player’s performance. This
gameplay mechanic ensures the exercise will be appro-
priate for players of varying physical fitness, and also
supports an individual player’s skill development over
time.
3 Astrojumper
Astrojumper is an immersive virtual reality exercise
game developed for use with a stereoscopic projection
display and full upper-body motion tracking. In this
section, we describe our gameplay design and the virtual
reality setup used to evaluate the game.
3.1 Game Design
In Astrojumper, the user flies through an immer-
sive, stereoscopic outer space environment in first-
person perspective and must swerve around, duck under,
and jump over the virtual planets that are speeding
toward him or her (see Figure 2[a]). The user wears
trackers on the forehead, wrists, and waist, which are
used to calculate body collisions with the virtual objects.
A base of one point is awarded per second, and the
player can tap gold suns to gain bonus score multipliers
which increase the amount of points earned per second
(see Figure 2[b]). If any part of the users’ tracked body
collides with a planet, their score is frozen for 2 s, with
multiple planet collisions resulting in a score freeze for
up to 15 s. Collisions also eliminate any score multipliers
the user may have collected. If the player is currently in
a score freeze, bonus objects will reduce the freeze by
2 s; otherwise, the player will gain 30 points in addition
to adding to the score multiplier. Periodically through-
out the game, UFOs appear and begin shooting red laser
beams at the location of the player’s head. The player
needs to dodge these beams, and can shoot green lasers
by making strong throwing motions with an arm until
the UFO is defeated. Music was played throughout the
game session, since this has been shown to be important
for promoting the enjoyment of exercise (Winniger &
Pargman, 2003).
Because people are encouraged to engage in exercise
multiple times per week (American College of Sports
Medicine, 2000), replayability is an important factor in
Finkelstein et al. 83
the design of exergames. If too repetitive, exergames
may run the risk of boring their users, or not provid-
ing the necessary motivation for individuals to play
the game often enough to result in appreciable health
benefits. Additionally, the American College of Sports
Medicine suggests engaging in cross-training activities
which vary the type of physical motion performed dur-
ing exercise. For both of these reasons, we embraced the
idea of using laser beams and bonus planets in our game
design. Without these features, the movements users are
encouraged to perform would be somewhat limited to
jumping side to side, ducking, and swerving to avoid
the planets. However, the addition of bonus planets that
were meant to be grabbed engaged the users’ bodies in
more diverse ways, allowing for stretching and reaching.
Allowing the player to periodically shoot laser beams by
making throwing motions also increased the exercise
diversity provided by Astrojumper, making it possible
for the user to get an arm workout as well. While provid-
ing a more diverse exercise environment, these features
also diversify the game as a whole, perhaps improving
the overall replayability. Though no formal data were
collected during early testing studies, preliminary ver-
sions of Astrojumper that did not include these features
were criticized for being too repetitive. After the addi-
tion of bonus planets and lasers, this criticism became
significantly less common.
Providing feedback to the player was an important
focus in the design of Astrojumper. Following Sweetser’s
gameflow model, we provided clear notification of
events such as collisions and bonuses using colored text,
sound, and particle effects. Pop-up text notified partic-
ipants of which body part had collided with a planet,
allowing them to be more conscious of the positions of
their limbs. More generally, the heads-up score display
also changed color to reflect the participant’s current
performance, with a score printed in green indicating
the player was doing well, and a score printed in red
meaning the player is currently frozen.
Following the American College of Sports Medicine’s
guidelines for exercise (American College of Sports
Medicine, 2000), a complete game session of Astro-
jumper follows three phases: warm-up (15%), exertion
(70%), and cooldown (15%). During the warm-up
session, the planets move very slowly and gradually build
up to a more challenging speed during the exertion
phase. The speed slows down again for the cooldown
phase, allowing for a gradual decrease in physical effort.
Though game sessions may last any amount of time,
for our evaluation in this paper, we used a total game
time of 15min (2.25min warm-up, 10.5min exertion,
2.25min cooldown).
Putting Sinclair’s dual-flow exergame model into
practice and following the suggestion of Smith et al.
(2005), Astrojumper’s difficulty level adjusted dynam-
ically throughout the game. To make sure that Astro-
jumper would be playable for users at all levels of
physical fitness, Astrojumper begins very slowly, pro-
viding all users with a warm-up phase. After this phase
is complete, planets will begin to gradually come out at
a slightly faster rate. If the player is successfully able to
avoid these planets, the speed will continue to increase.
If the player starts to collide with the planets, their speed
will reduce. This back-and-forth adjustment finds a
speed where the player can successfully avoid almost all
of the planets, and will continuously update throughout
the game. To calculate this within our game, we collect
information about how well the player is doing every
3 s as a percentage that indicates how many planets they
avoided out of all presented planets. If this calculated
percentage gets lower each time it is calculated, it indi-
cates that the game is too difficult, and the stimuli will
slow. If the percentage stays the same or gets higher,
the planets will increase in speed. This design is in line
with the dual-flow model, which suggests that gameflow
needs to be balanced between too easy (boring) and too
difficult (frustrating).
3.2 VR Setup
We deployed Astrojumper on a three-sided immer-
sive projection display with 8? ×6? rear-projected screens.
Two Barco Gemini stereoscopic projectors were used for
each screen, and circular polarized glasses were worn on
the user’s head. A Polhemus Fastrak electromagnetic
tracker was attached to the user’s glasses, and two track-
ers were enclosed within sweatbands on the user’s wrists
(see Figure 3). The users wore a small backpack to guide
84 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
Figure 3. Users wore a small backpack to guide the tracker wires around the body, allowing them to move freely without without getting tangled.
the tracker wires to each tracked portion of the body,
allowing the user to move freely without getting tan-
gled. A fourth tracker was attached to the bottom of the
backpack to track the user’s waist.
Astrojumper was run on a single Intel Core i7
3.33GHz PC running Windows 7 64-bit with 12GB
of RAM and three NVIDIA GTX 260 graphics cards,
each of which provided output for a single projector.
The game was implemented using the osgVirtualEnvi-
ronment engine, which is an open-source engine built
on top of OpenSceneGraph 2.8.0. Graphics were mod-
eled in 3D Studio Max, and were rendered in stereo
at 60 frames per second. Audio was provided through
OpenAL, and tracker communication was accomplished
using the virtual reality peripheral network (Taylor
et al., 2001). Astrojumper’s engine is dynamically con-
figurable, which allows us the capability of deploying
the game on different hardware on the fly (e.g., head-
mounted displays, stereo plasma displays, portable
projection-based setups, etc.).
4 Evaluation
Thirty people participated in the study (19
male, 11 female) ranging in age from 6 to 50 (M =
21.17, SD = 9.53). Ten participants were children (ages
6–17) and 20 were adults (ages 18–50). Participants
were recruited primarily via word of mouth and were
not limited to university students. All participants were
told the study would require exercise, and that they were
not eligible to participate if they had a medical condition
which prohibited voluntary physical exertion.
4.1 Procedure
4.1.1 Stage 1: Preexperiment. Participants
were invited to come to the UNC Charlotte Visualiza-
tion Center one at a time for a total of 45min. First,
they were asked to read and sign an informed consent
form and were given the opportunity to ask questions
about the VR equipment and the study. We explained
that we were evaluating how people interacted with an
exercise game, though to reduce demand characteris-
tics, the participants were not told we were specifically
looking at motivating factors. After the consent form
was signed, we attached a HeartMath emWave Desktop
heart rate monitor to the participant’s earlobe to obtain
their resting heart rate. We allowed the system to cali-
brate for 30 s, and then calculated the average heart rate
over 2min. Participants were then given a prequestion-
naire to gather demographic information, activity level,
exercise motivation, and video game habits.
4.1.2 Stage 2: Astrojumper. Participants were
led to the immersive display and were shown how to
Finkelstein et al. 85
put on the backpack and trackers. Astrojumper’s virtual
world was displayed on the walls, allowing the partic-
ipants some time to adjust to the 3D stimuli before
the game started. At this point, we explained the rules
of the game to the players and showed them how to
react to the various types of virtual objects they would
encounter. We allowed participants to ask any ques-
tions they had, and then started the 15min game session
when the players were ready. During the game, we held
the wires approximately 6 ft behind the participants to
ensure they would not trip, and did not communicate
with them unless they asked us a question about the
game.
4.1.3 Stage 3: Postexperiment. After the ses-
sion was finished, we instructed participants to remove
the backpack, and then calculated their exerted heart
rate as was done previously. Next, the participants were
asked to fill out a postquestionnaire which included free-
response questions and questions related to workout
intensity, motivation, and gameflow. After completing
the questionnaire, participants were debriefed and the
experiment was concluded.
4.2 Measures
4.2.1 Heart Rate. True resting heart rate is typ-
ically measured by taking a heart rate reading for several
mornings in a row before a person gets up from bed.
However, since collecting this rate was infeasible for this
study, we used a proxy measure for resting heart rate
at the beginning of our study. We used a HeartMath
emWave Desktop heart rate monitor to measure the
subject’s resting heart rate (in beats per minute) before
game play and exerted heart rate immediately after
the Astrojumper game session. We also calculated the
exerted heart rate as a percentage of each participant’s
estimated maximum heart rate, which is frequently
used for estimating the target heart rate recommended
to receive the benefits of physical exercise (American
Heart Association: Target Heart Rates, 2010). We esti-
mated the maximum heart rate using the following
formulas based on the participant’s age and gender:
205.8 ? 0.685 × age for males (Robergs & Landwehr,
2002) and 206.0 ? 0.88 × age for females (Gulati et al.,
2010). It should be noted that since the gameplay ses-
sion included a cooldown phase, the heart rate after
the session would have dropped from the peak levels
that occurred during gameplay. We attempted to collect
heart rate information during the exertion phase, but we
were unable to obtain valid readings using this monitor
due to participants’ rapid physical movements. Regard-
less, the differences in percentage of maximum heart
rate before and after gameplay still gives us an objective,
albeit conservative, measurement of participants’ phys-
iological reactions to the physical activity required to
play Astrojumper. While a significant rise in heart rate
would imply that they had engaged in strenuous exer-
cise, no change in heart rate would indicate that either
Astrojumper gameplay did not require enough exertion
or that participants were not sufficiently motivated to
engage in physical activity.
4.2.2 Workout Intensity,Motivation, and
Gameflow Evaluation. Participants were asked
to subjectively rate their workout intensity on a
7-point Likert scale (1 = “not at all intense” to
7 = “extremely intense”). This was done to assess the
perceived level of intensity of their exercise during the
game session.
To gauge the motivation potential of Astrojumper,
participants were asked to complete eight questions
pertaining to their level of motivation. This series of
statements were evaluated using 7-point Likert scales
(1 = “strongly disagree” to 7 = “strongly agree”).
Some questions on this survey included “I would rather
do game-based exercise over typical exercise,” “I put
more effort into my movements than I would have
if there wasn’t any virtual simulation,” and “I would
exercise more if I could play Astrojumper whenever I
wanted.” The ratings from individual questions were
averaged together to calculate the motivation score.
To assess Astrojumper’s gameflow, participants were
also presented with eight gameflow components from
Sweetser’s model and asked to rate (1) how present
these characteristics were in Astrojumper, and (2) how
present these characteristics should be in exercise games
in general. Ratings were collected using a 5-point scale
86 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
of importance (1 = “not at all,” 2 = “somewhat,”
3 = “moderately,” 4 = “mostly,” 5 = “completely”).
For each gameflow component, we calculated a game-
flow score by dividing the Astrojumper rating by the
ideal exercise game rating. The resulting percentage
represents the degree to which Astrojumper met par-
ticipants’ gameflow expectations for exercise games. It
should be noted that a score may be over 100% if Astro-
jumper were rated higher in a particular category than
the general exercise rating. To produce an overall game-
flow evaluation score that represents the degree to which
Astrojumper fell short of participants’ gameflow expec-
tations, we capped the individual gameflow component
scores at 100% and then averaged them. By considering
only the differences where Astrojumper was rated lower
than the ideal exergame, we avoided an aggregated score
that was potentially misleading.
4.2.3 Video Game and Exercise Habits. We
provided participants with a preexperiment question-
naire that gathered their basic demographics, video
game experience, and exercise habits. For video game
experience, participants were asked to rate the degree to
which they enjoy playing video games on a 7-point Lik-
ert scale, with higher numbers corresponding to greater
video game enjoyment. Participants were also asked to
classify themselves in one of four gaming categories
(“nongamer,” “casual gamer,” “moderate gamer,”
“hardcore gamer”).
To gather how active our participants were, we used
the Godin Leisure-Time Exercise Questionnaire, a short
survey that collects how many times in a typical week
the subject engages in mild, moderate, and strenu-
ous physical activity, with a greater weight applied to
more strenuous exercise (Godin & Shephard, 1997).
As described by Godin and Shephard, these three com-
ponents were then combined to calculate an overall
score that indicated how active our participants were,
with higher numbers corresponding to greater amounts
of overall physical activity. We also administered the
motives for physical activity measure to gauge our par-
ticipants’ motivations for choosing to exercise (Ryan,
Frederick, Lepes, Rubio, & Sheldon, 1997). Partici-
pants were provided questions regarding five distinct
possible reasons for exercising: interest in a particular
sport, wanting to gain skill or competence at an activity,
desire to improve fitness or health, desire to appear more
attractive, and desire to achieve benefits of social inter-
action, such as playing a sport with a friend. Participants
were presented six statements relating to each of these
five components, and were asked to rate their agree-
ment with the statement on a scale from 1 (“strongly
disagree”) to 5 (“strongly agree”). Overall motivation
for each component was calculated by averaging the
scores for the six related statements within each cate-
gory. These two exercise questionnaires allowed us to
gauge not only the frequency of our participants’ exer-
cise, but also the underlying motivations behind their
reasons for engaging in physical activities.
4.2.4 Qualitative Feedback. After playing
Astrojumper, participants were asked to discuss their
favorite and least favorite aspects of the game in free-
response boxes. They were also given an opportunity to
provide general feedback and comments.
4.3 Results
All statistical results reported in this paper use a
significance value of ? = .05.
4.3.1 Heart Rate. Participants’ heart rates (in
beats per minute) were treated with a 2 × 2 mixed anal-
ysis of variance (ANOVA), testing the between-subjects
effects of gender and the within-subjects effect of time
(resting or exerted). Participants’ exerted heart rates
after the cooldown phase (M = 106.67, SD = 13.75)
were significantly higher than their resting heart rates
(M = 77.07, SD = 13.15), F (1, 28) = 98.31, p < .01,
?2p = .78. There was an overall main effect for gender
regardless of the time of measurement, with males expe-
riencing a slower heart rate than females. However, this
is a well-known physiological difference between gen-
ders (Umetani, Singer, McCraty, & Atkinson, 1998).
The interaction effect between time and gender was not
significant, p = .94.
Table 1 shows a chart of the participants’ heart rates
before and after exertion, as well as the exerted rate
calculated as a percentage of maximum heart rate.
Finkelstein et al. 87
Table 1. Resting and Exerted Heart Rates
Heart rates Heart rates
Resting Exerted Exerted Resting Exerted Exerted
Age Sex (bpm) (bpm) (% max) Age Sex (bpm) (bpm) (% max)
6 F 81 100 50 20 F 85 122 65
8 F 75 111 56 20 F 89 106 56
9 M 67 75 38 22 F 67 102 55
12 M 65 102 52 22 M 82 100 52
14 M 64 95 48 23 M 92 115 61
14 M 80 110 56 24 M 82 109 58
14 F 118 119 61 24 F 92 118 64
15 M 72 121 62 25 M 62 114 60
15 M 79 91 46 26 F 63 129 70
16 M 73 113 58 27 M 57 120 64
18 M 65 87 45 28 M 94 118 63
19 F 67 100 53 30 M 60 70 38
19 M 86 95 49 31 M 65 103 56
19 F 87 115 61 45 F 84 105 63
20 M 77 119 62 50 M 82 116 67
NOTE. Resting and exerted heart rates were measured immediately before and after the game session, which included
a cooldown stage. Playing Astrojumper resulted in an average heart rate increase of 29.6 beats per minute. Additionally,
24 out of 30 participants had exerted heart rates that were within the American Heart Association’s target heart rate
range for physical exercise (between 50–85% of maximum heart rate) even after this cooldown.
To receive the benefits of physical activity, the Amer-
ican Heart Association recommends a target heart
rate between 50–85% of the estimated maximum
heart rate (American Heart Association: Target Heart
Rates, 2010). Even though exerted heart rates were
measured after the cooldown phase, allowing then to
drop from the peak levels achieved during exercise,
24 out of 30 participants were within this target zone
(M = 56.31%, SD = 8.05%). Additionally, participants’
exerted percentage of maximum heart rates were signif-
icantly correlated with age, r(30) = +.44, p = .02,
indicating that older participants tended to experience
higher heart rates, even though the heart rate maximum
formula had already accounted for age differences.
4.3.2 Workout Intensity,Motivation, and
Gameflow Evaluation. The subjective workout
intensity ratings (1–7) indicated that participants felt
Astrojumper provided a moderate to high level of phys-
ical exercise (M = 5.07, SD = 1.44). Additionally,
participants’ motivation scores (1–7) indicated that
Astrojumper successfully motivated them to exercise
(M = 5.69, SD = 1.10). We excluded two partici-
pants from the gameflow analysis because they did not
understand the instructions, both of whom were young
children (ages 6 and 9). The overall average gameflow
score also indicated that Astrojumper came close to
completely fulfilling participants’ expectations for the
ideal exercise game on a variety of gameflow character-
istics (M = 90.59%, SD = 7.13%). Figure 4 shows the
breakdown of the gameflow rating scores for each of the
eight categories.
The relationship between age, motivation, work-
out intensity, and overall gameflow evaluation score
was assessed using Pearson correlation coefficients.
There was a significant positive relationship between
88 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
motivation and workout intensity, r(30) = +.49,
p < .01. The gameflow evaluation score was positively
correlated with both workout intensity, r(28) = +.45,
p = .02, and motivation, r(28) = +.41, p = .03. None
of the correlations with age were significant. These
results suggest that to design exercise games that pro-
vide an effective workout, participants’ gameflow
expectations and their level of motivation should be
considered.
4.3.3 Video Game and Exercise Habits. Our
participant pool consisted of seven nongamers, 15
casual gamers, five moderate gamers, and three hard-
core gamers. For video game enjoyment ratings (1–7),
most participants indicated they enjoyed playing video
games (M = 5.17, SD = 1.15). Responses on the
Godin Leisure-Time activity scale indicated that partic-
ipants tended to engage in moderate levels of exercise
(M = 53.97, SD = 31.84), though this varied
greatly among participants. The motives for physical
activity measure (1–5) rated most important by our
participants was fitness (M = 4.19, SD = 0.82),
followed by interest (M = 3.49, SD = 0.84), appear-
ance (M = 3.33, SD = 1.28), and competence
(M = 3.28, SD = 1.05). Social motivations were rated
as least important (M = 2.87, SD = 1.23).
To assess the potential impact on video game and
exercise habits on exercise game design, we computed
Pearson correlation coefficients between the subjec-
tive ratings of motivation and workout intensity and our
measures of video game enjoyment, Godin Leisure-Time
activity, and the motives for physical activity. However,
none of these factors significantly correlated with the
degree of motivation to play Astrojumper or the level
of workout experienced by participants. Additionally,
none of the video game or exercise habit measures were
significantly correlated with age.
4.3.4 Qualitative Feedback. In general, we
received extremely positive feedback, and participants
cited a variety of reasons for their motivation to play the
game. Three of our younger participants said that the
game allowed them to pretend they were various super-
heroes or cartoon characters, with a 12-year-old male
Figure 4. Participant gameflow evaluation scores were calculated
by dividing Astrojumper’s rating by the general rating of importance
in exergames for each gameflow category. Thus, the percentages
represent to the degree to which Astrojumper satisfied participants’
gameflow expectations.
participant citing that he enjoyed inventing different
“move styles” to change character roles. Two partic-
ipants mentioned that they most enjoyed the quick
thinking and strategy that was required to maximize the
score, and an additional four described how much they
enjoyed engaging in full-body interaction. Three par-
ticipants directly compared Astrojumper to the Wii Fit,
saying that full-body exercise was much more motivating
and effective, one stating it was “much more than the
Wii could ever offer.”
Most participants mentioned specific gameplay
aspects of Astrojumper. For example, a 19-year-old male
participant wrote:
My favorite part of Astrojumper was the fact that it
didn’t really feel like exercise—I wasn’t focused on my
heart rate or trying to “push” myself. I just played the
game. It wasn’t until afterwards it had felt like I had
done any exercise.
Additionally, a 22-year-old male mentioned:
I most enjoyed the amount of quick, snap decision
movements that were required. It incorporated both
top and bottom movements, and this basic sort of
game could hone some very sharp coordination skills.
Finkelstein et al. 89
The negative feedback we received was much less var-
ied: out of 30 participants, 17 either left this question
blank or wrote that they had no complaints or nega-
tive comments. Five participants complained that there
were times when they had been penalized for hitting
a planet when they felt they were out of its way. This
was unavoidable, and was due to inconsistent tracking
data that occurred when the electromagnetic track-
ers were out of range of the emitter. Since the emitter
was mounted from the ceiling, this sometimes occurred
when participants dropped to the floor to duck under a
planet. Three participants said they would have preferred
a larger tracking area so they would have some more
room to move around, and the other five simply offered
suggestions for ways to make the game more fun, such
as adding boss fights, additional enemies, or making it
easier to beat the UFO.
Finally, we received many positive accolades in the
free-comment section. Some responses included: “it
was amazing, it should be a real video game I could play
whenever I want,” “I loved all of it, and would recom-
mend it to anybody,” and “This was one of the best
games I’ve ever played. I actually enjoyed exercise!”
Additionally, many participants (over half) requested
to play the game a second time, and we received many
requests from friends of participants who heard about
the game, even after the study was over.
4.4 Discussion
As Sinclair’s dual-flow model suggests, our results
indicated there is an important relationship between
gameplay attractiveness (measured by our gameflow
evalation) and exercise effectiveness (measured by rat-
ings of workout intensity). These results reinforce the
claim that exergames need to be fun and engaging in
order to maximize their effectiveness as an exercise tool.
Additionally, the relationship we found between moti-
vation and workout intensity supports the basic premise
that games can be used to motivate physical activity.
In order to better understand the design of
exergames, we investigated the potential influence of
personal factors such as video game experience, exer-
cise habits, and reasons for engaging in exercise on
participants’ motivation and perceived workout. How-
ever, regardless of these criteria, Astrojumper received
overwhelmingly positive ratings. While we were not
able to develop any specific design guidelines, this is a
very interesting result, since it suggests that virtual real-
ity exergames may have broad appeal for a wide variety
of users. Though participants were strongly motivated
regardless of gender or age, we noticed qualitative dif-
ferences in comments from children and adults. For
example, free-response comments from the children
in our study frequently mentioned getting “lost” in
their fantasy world. This is consistent with a previous
exergame study which found that an increase in fan-
tasy level correlated strongly with children’s levels of
enjoyment (Yannakakis et al., 2006). However, feed-
back from the adult participants often mentioned being
compelled by the challenge and skill required to play
the game. Though participants may perceive the game
differently, we conclude that immersive virtual reality
exergames have strong potential to motivate physical
activity in both children and adults, regardless of their
video game and exercise habits.
Astrojumper was designed to be rated “E for every-
one,” in that we chose to design a game atmosphere,
outer space, which we felt was both gender and age neu-
tral. The consistently high levels of motivation across
all of our participants may be attributed to this design
choice, as it showed no subculture preference to any
subset of our users. Additionally, because Astrojumper’s
mechanics were not very complex, we had no issues
with very young users not understanding the directions,
allowing them to enjoy the game as much as older users.
To this end, we believe that with careful consideration
to game design, it is possible to design exergames that
are enjoyable for all users. To ensure that participants
would not get bored by repetitive actions, we included
opportunities to collect bonuses, gain point multipliers,
and designed alternate interaction possibilities within
the game. For example, the user can throw an arm for-
ward with a punching motion to shoot a green laser
beam at periodically appearing UFOs. This not only
kept the game engaging by changing the types of actions
the users were performing, but also allowed users to
engage more of the body in physical activity, providing
90 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
an exercise environment which promoted cross-training
fitness. Some participants reported that throwing laser
beams was one of the most enjoyable aspects of the
game, and of the participants who suggested game
improvements, many involved ways that these alternate
interactions could be expanded in future versions of the
game. Some of these suggestions included the UFOs
getting increasingly hard to kill, more UFOs coming
at the player at once, or enemies that were aliens. The
addition of these features in future versions of the game
would add some variety to game play, and may increase
the replayability of the game. Though Astrojumper can
be set to last an arbitrary amount of time, for this study,
we knew we would be evaluating player interaction over
a relatively short game play interval. For this reason,
additional ways to keep players motivated to play over
an extended period of time, such as alternate levels or
some of the ideas the participants suggested, were not
implemented in this version of Astrojumper. However,
in future versions of this game that will be evaluated over
extended periods of time, features that will keep players
coming back will be included.
Participants perceived that they had experienced a
workout, and these subjective reports were corroborated
by the physiological measure of heart rate. However,
since we included a cooldown phase at the end of the
game session, by the time we measured participants’
exerted heart rates, they had time to drop from the
peak levels reached during exercise. Despite that fact, we
observed an increase of 29.6 beats per minute (38%) on
average even after the cooldown phase. We were encour-
aged by these results, and by our qualitative observations
that participants often did, quite literally, work up a
sweat. The talk test is a common self-test used to mea-
sure whether a person is exercising in his or her target
heart rate zone; if you find it hard to talk, you are in the
zone. We observed that most players were unable to talk
just after playing Astrojumper. In future studies we will
ask participants to report on this.
From our observations, the dynamic difficulty adjust-
ment worked well as a game mechanic, since participants
made no negative comments on our feedback questions
about the difficulty. We did not observe any cases where
participants appeared either bored or frustrated. We
are interested in further exploring this technique, and
possibly introducing more sophisticated approaches,
such as scaling the difficulty based on direct measure-
ments of heart rate (Stach, Graham, Yim, & Rhodes,
2009).
From the qualitative comments, it is clear that stere-
oscopy was a motivating factor for participants, as some
specifically mentioned stereoscopy (which many referred
to simply as “3D”) as one of the most exciting parts of
the game. Almost all participants expressed excitement
when they first put on the stereoscopic glasses and saw
the game environment, such as laughing or exclaiming
sentiments such as “it’s like the planet is right in front
of me!” Further analysis needs to be done to see how
much of the participants’ enjoyment of the game can
be attributed to the stereoscopic factor. While many
participants expressed the idea that they felt immersed
in the game, it was not clear whether this was due to
the stereoscopic 3D or the three-screened CAVE envi-
ronment. Future studies are planned to isolate these
factors.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we presented Astrojumper, a vir-
tual reality exergame designed to engage the user in
immersive, full-body exercise. The results of our user
study were promising, and demonstrate that stereo-
scopic virtual reality exergames have strong potential
to motivate physical activity in both children and adults.
In future studies, we plan to directly compare the ben-
efits of virtual reality with less immersive exergame
platforms that do not employ stereoscopy, such as the
Wii Fit. Additionally, it may be possible to increase
accessibility for a wider audience by using commod-
ity wireless motion tracking instead of electromagnetic
trackers, and by deploying Astrojumper on a less expen-
sive portable stereoscopic projector or 3D television.
Finally, we are also very interested in studying different
user populations to further investigate design issues for
exergaming.
We acknowledge that since virtual reality technology
is not yet widely accessible, some of our participants’
positive reactions may have been due to a novelty factor.
Finkelstein et al. 91
In the future, we plan to perform longitudinal studies
to examine the long-term effectiveness and motivation
potential of Astrojumper. To maintain interest after
repeated exposure, we intend to implement additional
levels and themes, boss fights, and alternate interaction
possibilities, such as new gestures and game mechanics.
References
Acuff, D. S., & Reiher, R. H. (1997). What kids buy and why:
The psychology of marketing to kids. New York: Free Press.
American College of Sports Medicine (2000). ACSM’s guide-
lines for exercise testing and prescription (6th ed.). Baltimore,
MD: Lippincott, Williams, & Williams.
American Heart Association: Target heart rates. (2010).
Retrieved from http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.
jhtml?identifier=4736.
Bekker, M., Hoven, E. van den, Peters, P., & Hemmink,
B. K. (2007). Stimulating children’s physical play through
interactive games: Two exploratory case studies. In IDC
’07: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Interaction Design and Children, 163–164.
Chua, P. T., Crivella, R., Daly, B., Hu, N., Schaaf, R., Ven-
tura, D., et al. (2003). Training for physical tasks in virtual
environments: Tai chi. In VR ’03: Proceedings of IEEE
Virtual Reality 2003, 87.
Chuang, T., Chen, C., Chang, H., Lee, H., Chou, C., &
Doong, J. (2003). Virtual reality serves as a support
technology in cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Pres-
ence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 12(3),
326–331.
Godin, G., & Shephard, R. J. (1997). Godin leisure-time
exercise questionnaire. Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise, 29(6), S36–S38.
Grealy, M. A., Johnson, D. A., & Rushton, S. K. (1999).
Improving cognitive function after brain injury: The
use of exercise and virtual reality. Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 80(6), 661–667.
Gruchalla, K. (2005). Immersive well-path editing: Investi-
gating the added value of immersion. IEEE Virtual Reality,
157–164.
Gulati, M., Shaw, L. J., Thisted, R. A., Black, H. R.,
Bairey Merz, C. N., & Arnsdorf, M. F. (2010). Heart rate
response to exercise stress testing in asymptomatic women:
The St. James Women Take Heart Project. Circulation,
122(2), 130–137.
Hämäläinen, P., Ilmonen, T., Höysniemi, J., Lindholm, M.,
& Nykänen, A. (2005). Martial arts in artificial reality. In
CHI ’05: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 781–790.
Hendrix, C., & Barfield, W. (1995). Presence in virtual envi-
ronments as a function of visual and auditory cues. In
Virtual Reality Annual International Symposium, 74.
Höysniemi, J., Hämäläinen, P., Turkki, L., & Rouvi, T.
(2005). Children’s intuitive gestures in vision-based action
games. Communications of the ACM, 48(1), 44–50.
IJsselsteijn, W. A., de Kort, Y. A. W., Westerink, J., de Jager,
M., & Bonants, R. (2006). Virtual fitness: Stimulating
exercise behavior through media technology. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 15(6), 688–698.
Kizony, R., Katz, N., & Weiss, P. (2003). Adapting an immer-
sive virtual reality system for rehabilitation. The Journal of
Visualization and Computer Animation, 14, 261–268.
Luke, R. C., Coles, M. G., Anderson, T. A., & Gilbert, J. N.
(2005). Oxygen cost and heart rate response during inter-
active whole body video gaming. Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise, 37(5), S329.
Marshall, S.J., Gorely, T., & Biddle, S. J. H. (2006). A
descriptive epidemiology of screen-based media use in
youth: A review and critique. Journal of Adolescence, 29(3),
333–349.
Mokka, S., Väätänen, A., Heinilä, J., & Välkkynen, P.
(2003). Fitness computer game with a bodily user inter-
face. In ICEC ’03: Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on Entertainment Computing, 1–3.
Morrow, K., Docan, C., Burdea, G., & Merians, A. (2003).
Low-cost virtual rehabilitation of the hand for patients post-
stroke. In International Workshop on Virtual Rehabilitation,
6–10.
Mueller, F., Agamanolis, S., & Picard, R. (2003). Exertion
interfaces: Sports over a distance for social bonding and
fun. In CHI ’03: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 561–568.
Mueller, F. F., Stevens, G., Thorogood, A., O’Brien, S., &
Wulf, V. (2007). Sports over a distance. Personal Ubiquitous
Computing, 11(8), 633–645.
Plante, T., Aldridge, A., Bogdan, R., & Hanelin, C. (2003).
Might virtual reality promote the mood benefits of exercise?
Journal of Community Psychology, 19(4), 495–509.
Porcari, J. P., Zedaker, M. S., & Maldari, M. S. (1998,
December). Virtual motivation. Fitness Management,
48–51.
Rand, D., Kizony, R., & Weiss, P. L. (2004). Virtual reality
rehabilitation for all: Vivid GX versus Sony Playstation II
EyeToy.
92 PRESENCE: VOLUME 20, NUMBER 1
Rand, D., Kizony, R., & Weiss, P. L. (2008). The Sony
Playstation II EyeToy: Low-cost virtual reality for use in
rehabilitation. Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy, 32(4),
155–163.
Robergs, R., & Landwehr, R. (2002). The surprising history
of the “HRmax = 220 ? age” equation. Journal of Exercise
Physiology, 5(2), 1–10.
Ryan, R. M., Frederick, C. M., Lepes, D., Rubio, N., &
Sheldon, K. M. (1997). Intrinsic motivation and exercise
adherence. International Journal of Sport Psychology, 28,
335–354.
Sinclair, J., Hingston, P., & Masek, M. (2007). Consider-
ations for the design of exergames. In GRAPHITE ’07:
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Com-
puter Graphics and Interactive Techniques in Australia and
Southeast Asia, 289–295.
Smith, B. K. (2005). Physical fitness in virtual worlds.
Computer, 38, 101–103.
Stach, T., Graham, T. C. N., Yim, J., & Rhodes, R. E.
(2009). Heart rate control of exercise video games.
In GI ’09: Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2009,
125–132.
Strömberg, H., Väätänen, A., & Räty, V.-P. (2002). A group
game played in interactive virtual space: Design and eval-
uation. In DIS ’02: Proceedings of the 4th Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems, 56–63.
Sweetser, P., & Wyeth, P. (2005). Gameflow: A model for
evaluating player enjoyment in games. Computers in Enter-
tainment (CIE), 3(3). doi: 10.1145/1077246.1077253.
Taylor, R. M., Hudson, T. C., Seeger, A., Weber, H., Juliano,
J., & Helser, A. T. (2001). VRPN: A device-independent,
network-transparent VR peripheral system. In ACM Virtual
Reality Software & Technology, 55–61.
Umetani, K., Singer, D. H., McCraty, R., & Atkinson, M.
(1998). Twenty-four hour time domain heart rate variabil-
ity and heart rate: Relations to age and gender over nine
decades. Journal of the American College of Cardiology,
31(3), 593–601.
Winniger, S., & Pargman, D. (2003). Assessment of fac-
tors associated with exercise enjoyment. Journal of Music
Therapy, 40, 50–73.
Yannakakis, G. N., Hallam, J., & Lund, H. H. (2006).
Comparative fun analysis in the innovative playware game
platform. In Proceedings of the 1st World Conference for Fun
’n Games, 64–70.

