EuroVis Workshop on Visual Analytics (2013), pp. 1ñ5
M. Pohl and H. Schumann (Editors)
Social Media Analytics for Competitive Advantage
William Ribarsky, Ü1 Xiaoyu Wang, á 1 and Wenwen Dou, ß 1
1The Charlotte Visualization Center
UNC Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
Abstract
Big Data Analytics is getting a great deal of attention in the business and government communities. If it lives up
to its name, visual analytics will be a prime path by which visualization competes successfully in this arena. This
paper discusses some fundamental work we have done in this area through integration of interactive visualization
and automated analysis methods and the applications that have resulted.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Visualization [I.6.9.A]: ó
1. Introduction
As we know, big data analytics has become more than a
term, it is now a movement. Whether or not ìbig dataî is
a buzzword or not, there is reason to believe that interest
in the broader issues surrounding not just scalably large
data but even more so data that are complex and can be
associated with problems that require complex reasoning
will not abate soon and could even grow stronger. There
are many reasons for this. More companies (and govern-
ment agencies, too) are building comprehensive and long-
term databases. But there is a growing realization that tra-
ditional database techniques, though they are in principle
scalable and useful for many things, canít tell you basic
things about what the database contains and what the im-
portant relations and trends are [Oli]. (For example, we have
worked with a bank that has a very large, comprehensive
transactional database yet struggles to use all the value it
contains.) In addition, the advent of social media and online
sources show that useful data can come from anywhere, in-
side or outside the company. Due to the availability of all
these data, there is a growing push to increase data-driven
decision-making, but this is hampered, as inferred above, by
not knowing what actionable information the data contains.
Finally, business studies indicate that timely, effective use of
data-derived knowledge is a competitive advantage and that
not using this knowledge effectively is a competitive dis-
Ü Email to: ribarsky@uncc.edu
á Email to: xiaoyu.wang@uncc.edu
ß Email to: wenwen.dou@uncc.edu
advantage [MCB11, LL11, Thi12]. Companies who do not
marshal their data resources will be losers in the long term.
In fact, those that find new uses for their or other data will
be the biggest winners.
Another reason that big data analytics will have staying
power is that a robust infrastructure is being built. Based on
surveys in the U.S. alone, McKinsey estimates that there will
be a deficit of nearly 200K professionals with deep analytics
skills by 2018 and the need to retrain 1.4M managers so that
they understand the value of data and know the right ques-
tions to ask [MCB11]. Gartner estimates that 1.9M big data
jobs will be created in the U.S. by 2015 [Thi12]. It will be
hard to fill even a fraction of this need at the current rate of
production for data analytics professionals.
The premise of this paper is that visualization and espe-
cially visual analytics is ideally positioned to take advantage
of this opportunity. By its nature, visual analytics supports
exploration, discovery, and complex reasoning about data
and data-driven problems. Statistical, data mining, machine
learning, signal processing, and other deep analytics meth-
ods are tightly integrated with interactive visualizations. Vi-
sual analytics aims to put the human in the loop at just the
right point to discover key insights, develop deep under-
standing, make decisions, and take effective action. On both
the visualization side and the analytics side, visual analytics
is positioned to effectively manage and support understand-
ing of scalably large data, and this promise is being made
concrete as new techniques are developed [WDM?12]. Be-
cause of the central role of visual analytics, there is also the
opportunity to imbue the massive influx of new data analyt-
submitted to EuroVis Workshop on Visual Analytics (2013)
2 R. Ribarsky & X. Wang & W. Dou / Social Media Analytics for Competitive Advantage
ics professionals with knowledge of visual analytics through
courses and training. This should definitely be a key part of
the visual analytics academic agenda; it will result in a whole
generation of analysts, engineers, and managers who appre-
ciate and know how to use these tools.
In this paper, we will address how competitive advantage
can be derived from the analysis of unstructured data, espe-
cially social media data (though the techniques used can be
applied to a broader range of unstructured data). We will use
mostly examples from our own work, though there is a range
of other work.
2. The Nature of the Data
We focus on streaming Twitter data in this paper. We have
been collecting a 1% random sample of these data for nearly
1.75 years. This results in a large number of tweets (now
in excess of 20B). We have used this Twitter collection
as a testbed for several recent studies with diverse sub-
jects [WDM?12, DWS?12, WDMR13, DWL?13] including
the ones reported here. We are now building a collection of
texts from Facebook posts, which will permit us to explore a
different demographic range than that for Facebook.
Text messages from Twitter, Facebook, and several other
social media services have general attributes such as unstruc-
tured content and intrinsic uncertainty as to the validity of
the messages. In addition, these data have the attributes of
data physicality and data sociality. The messages are often
intimately connected with particular times and locations (ei-
ther locating where and when the message was sent or by
mention of places and dates, either past, present, or future
in the message body. Of course, social medial messages are
sent, received, or re-sent by people, so there can be a rich
social connectivity revealed. The availability of such infor-
mation, often minute-by-minute or over the whole length of
a story that may take months to unfold, is a new and very
powerful aspect of social media analyses.
3. Topic Modeling and Entity Extraction
To provide meaning and organization to the unstructured
data, we use Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [BNJ03,
DWCR11], which reveals latent topics from large text col-
lections, which are then described by coherent sets of key-
words (with the leading words being the most meaningful
for the topic, as illustrated in Figure 2). To this we add
named entity recognition, based on a customized dictionary
and the use of LingPipe with statistical chunking. This per-
mits the identification of people, locations, buildings, times,
dates, etc. from within the text messages. We have extended
the traditional LDA approach to handle temporal features
and structure (in particular events, as described further be-
low). We have also developed scalable capabilities for ef-
ficiently generating topics even for very large text collec-
tions [WDM?12]. We have successfully applied these tech-
niques to a range of text collections including project ab-
stracts, reports, research papers, streaming Twitter data, and
recently patent descriptions. This set of approaches provides
the ability to attack unstructured data both inside and outside
the company, conferring competitive advantage [NN12].
4. Events and Time Structuring
The fundamental component of our time structuring is the
event, which we define as a ìmeaningful occurrence in space
and timeî. Events are bursts of activity over a relatively short
time period, the time scale depending on the category of the
temporal data. For example, with streaming Twitter data, a
typical single event burst lasts one to two days; major events
can be longer lasting, but they usually can be divided into
sub-events. In this paper events are associated with a partic-
ular topic (as shown in Figure 1) so that an event occurs for
a particular topic, time, and set of extracted entities (e.g., lo-
cation, indicated past or future times, names of people, etc.
extracted from the social media texts). Thus in the case of
the interactive interface we have developed for Twitter data,
a selection of an event chooses only those tweets for the
given topic and for the part of the event burst time range
selected. As discussed below, events provide a great focus
and together make up an interpretable narrative; thus this se-
lection is a powerful filtering tool.
Figure 1: Bursty structure for an event.
We perform one more analysis step on our event struc-
ture. We label as events only those bursty structures that
have a motivating event (see Figure 1). A motivating event
is an occurrence, either described in the event burst tweets
themselves (usually at the beginning) or external to this set
of tweets, that has motivated the bursty response. Most if
not all event bursts of this type are responses to the initial
motivating event. For example, the main topical events on
September 17, 2011 were clearly associated with the launch
of Occupy Wall Street (OWS) on that date at Zucotti Park
in New York City, but most of the associated tweets, from
individuals and from online news, were in response to this
event. In fact, OWS was large enough that there were sev-
eral topics with their associated events on that date. We have
found that by just analyzing the shape, size, and duration of
the burst, we can automatically identify events that will have
clear motivating events [LYK?12]. (These are the bursts with
dark outlines in Figure 2 and subsequent figures.) Thus we
have a mechanism for automatically identifying meaning-
ful events that we have tested successfully on multiple cate-
gories of data, not just streaming social media. This is not to
submitted to EuroVis Workshop on Visual Analytics (2013)
R. Ribarsky & X. Wang & W. Dou / Social Media Analytics for Competitive Advantage 3
Figure 2: Event view of Macyís womenís heart donation
campaign (Topic 09) and Belk/ Nieman Marcus beauty prod-
ucts promotion (Topic 09).
say that there are not other, unmarked bursts that are mean-
ingful. Nor is it to say that the meaning is immediately clear
from this analysis. Input from a human-in-the-loop is nec-
essary to resolve these questions. But this identification of
meaningful events is still a boon for exploratory analysis
since we have found it identifies most of the major events
and also directs the userís attention. We have applied all the
techniques in Secs. 3 and 4 to tell the complete story of OWS
from precursor discussion before the launch till now. This
shows how a comprehensive, rich narrative can be built effi-
ciently [WDMR13].
5. Deriving Competitive Advantage
In the rest of this paper, we discuss some business cases
that show how competitive advantage might be derived. We
first did a study of department stores in the Charlotte region
(Belk, Macyís, Dillards, Nieman Marcus, and Saks Fifth Av-
enue) by using messages with hash tags or entities naming
the stores and then bringing in related tweets through topic
modeling. The study was over a 10 month period starting
in Fall, 2011. About 15 main topics resulted for this time
period. They immediately revealed some general informa-
tion. Twitter response often had to do with marketing around
celebrations, charitable campaigns, and holiday events (e.g.,
Macyís Thanksgivings Day parade). There were often tie-
ins to womenís cosmetics and beauty products. Macyís had
the largest Twitter presence during the period followed by
Nieman Marcus. Belk had a growing presence later in the
period. Dillards never had much of a presence.
Figures 2 and 3 show specific events illustrating how de-
tailed analyses over time can be done (in this example re-
stricted to a 3 month period at the beginning of 2012). The
presented events plus other events that fill in the Twitter
Figure 3: Burst of negative responses to Rush Limbaugh’s
comments (associated with Macy online).
story for these stores were generated automatically and then
quickly studied in more detail by selecting associated tweets
for each topic and event. Figure 2 shows response to a mar-
keting effort associated with the gored for women heart cam-
paign sponsored by Macyís (Topic 09). It also shows merged
responses to two similar marketing efforts launched by Nie-
man Marcus and Belk on beauty products that started dur-
ing Super Bowl week and then continued for another week
or two. In both cases, the events can easily be identified by
looking at the lead words in the topic lists and some of the
associated tweets.
Figure 3 shows another type of event with a different tem-
poral structure. The event is conservative talk show host
Rush Limbaughís diatribe against a Georgetown Univer-
sity student because of her stand in favor of access to birth
control, and the response to his comments. The motivating
event caused a firestorm of comments against Limbaugh in-
cluding a burst of activity having to do with the StopRush
Twitter movement and its campaign to boycott sponsors of
Limbaughís show. Macyís became embroiled because of its
sponsorship. Although the event has to do with the spe-
cific outburst about the student, other bursts and events in
the same topic stream show other public complaints against
Limbaugh both before and after the event in Figure 4. This
stream of related activity goes over a period of months and
shows that negative events and associations, even if inadver-
tent, can have a long effect.
Figures 4 (A) and 4 (B) bottom show details from a set of
topical analyses having to do with several banks, including
those headquartered in the Charlotte region (such as Bank of
America), over a period of several months. The topic mod-
eling analysis was set up in a similar fashion as the depart-
ment store analysis; the set of topics is larger. In Figure 4 (A)
the indicated event was motivated by the initial exposure of
the multibillion dollar trading loss at JP Morgan Chase. The
submitted to EuroVis Workshop on Visual Analytics (2013)
4 R. Ribarsky & X. Wang & W. Dou / Social Media Analytics for Competitive Advantage
Figure 4: Top: (A) Event at the revelation of JP Morgan
Chase multibillion dollar trading loss (the London Whale).
Bottom: (B) Event revealing bankís strategies on hiring ad-
ditional workforce on mobile development.
sharp burst begins at the day of this disclosure; there was
also an associated stock market drop on that day. In addi-
tion, there is a series of events for the same topic before and
especially after the disclosure that tell the unfolding story of
this scandal.
Although most of the events in the banking analysis have
to do with disclosures like this, ongoing fallout from the
mortgage and banking collapse of 2008, and response to pro-
posed government regulations, there are still events and top-
ics that discuss other aspects. Figure 4 (B) gives a couple of
examples. Topic 08 has to do with the development of new
mobile debit and credit card apps. The event indicated is re-
sponse to actions by Walmart and Target, among others, and
reported in the Wall Street Journal and Forbes, to develop
their own mobile payment systems. This would eliminate the
middle men (the banks) and would be of great interest and
possible risk to them. These analyses show that even in this
case where the events are dominated by negative news about
banks, the exploratory visual analytics tools still find events
that tell banks about their competitive environment.
6. Conclusions
We have presented the work described here plus addition
analyses to a set of business partners from retail and bank-
ing. This has generated considerable interest and feedback.
The ability to analyze competitor strategies is considered im-
portant. There is a desire to know about the demographics
of the people generating messages for selected events and
also how retweeting spreads a message. (We are working on
both these things.) There is a desire to do targeted marketing
based on real-time streaming tweet analysis, and we have
developed a capability in this area. More generally, compa-
nies see the opportunity to analyze the response to marketing
and advertising campaigns as they unfold and also investi-
gate what affects the public view of their brand image (which
can be affected by external circumstances, as we have seen).
Banks want to do emerging risk analysis using both internal
and external sources. We also expect that the set of meth-
ods described in this paper will be applied in the future to
internal company data.
References
[BNJ03] BLEI D. M., NG A. Y., JORDAN M. I.: Latent dirich-
let allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (March 2003), 993ñ1022.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jmlr.2003.3.
4-5.993, doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jmlr.
2003.3.4-5.993. 2
[DWCR11] DOU W., WANG X., CHANG R., RIBARSKY W.:
Paralleltopics: A probabilistic approach to exploring document
collections. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
2011 IEEE Conference on (oct. 2011), pp. 231 ñ240. doi:
10.1109/VAST.2011.6102461. 2
[DWL?13] DOU W., WANG X., LI Y., MA Z., RIBARSKY W.:
Hierarchical topics: Visually exploring large text collections us-
ing topic hierarchies. Preliminary accepted to IEEE VAST
(2013). 2
[DWS?12] DOU W., WANG X., SKAU D., RIBARSKY W.,
ZHOU M. X.: Leadline: Interactive visual analysis of text data
through event identification and exploration. In Visual Analytics
Science and Technology (VAST), 2012 IEEE Conference on (oct.
2012). doi:10.1109/VAST.2011.6102461. 2
[LL11] LAVALLE S., LESSER E.: Big data, analytics and the path
from insights to value. In MIT Sloan Managment Review (May
2011), vol. 52. 1
[LYK?12] LUO D., YANG J., KRSTAJIC M., RIBARSKY W.,
KEIM D.: Eventriver: Visually exploring text collections with
temporal references. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on 18, 1 (jan. 2012), 93 ñ105. doi:10.
1109/TVCG.2010.225. 2
[MCB11] MANYIKA J., CHUI M., BROWN B.: Big data: The
next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. McK-
insey Global Institue, May 2011. 1
[NN12] NAIR R., NARAYANAN A.: Benefitting from Big Data:
Leveraging Unstructured Data Capabilities for Competitive Ad-
vantage. Booz and Company, 2012. 2
[Oli] OLIVER A.: Big data woes: Which database should i use?
Online. URL: InfoWorld. 1
[Thi12] THIBODEAU P.: Big data to create 1.9m it jobs in u.s. by
2015. ComputerWorld, August 2012. 1
[WDM?12] WANG X., DOU W., MA Z., VILLALOBOS J.,
CHEN Y., KRAFT T., RIBARSKY W.: I-SI: Scalable Ar-
chitecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information
From Social Media Data. Computer Graphics Forum 31, 3
(2012), 1275ñ1284. URL: http://diglib.eg.org/EG/
CGF/volume31/issue3/v31i3pp1275-1284.pdf,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8659.2012.03120.x. 1, 2
[WDMR13] WANG X., DOU W., MA Z., RIBARSKY W.: Dis-
cover diamonds-in-the-rough using interactive visual analytics
system: Tweets as a collective diary of the occupy movement.
In ICSWM 2013 (2013). 2, 3
submitted to EuroVis Workshop on Visual Analytics (2013)

