 1
Evaluating Geospatial and Semantic Recall of an Urban 
Environment Using GPS and Road Maps 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The use of a global positioning system (GPS) device for 
navigation tasks has been well studied and found to be more 
effective in guiding a user to their destination than 
traditional road maps. In this paper, we examine how the 
recall of our environment is affected by using each of these 
methods. We evaluate the two devices by measuring 
semantic and geospatial recall of 18 participants after a 
navigation task through an urban environment, and find that 
road map users demonstrated a significantly better 
geospatial understanding. Semantically, road map users 
identify semantic elements significantly more often using 
common terms compared to GPS users.  Lastly, road map 
users were significantly better at correctly placing semantic 
elements in geospatial locations and tend to concentrate the 
placements in tighter clusters than GPS users. 
Author Keywords 
Navigation, semantic information, geospatial information. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.2. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Evaluation/Methodology.  
INTRODUCTION 
It has been argued by urban planners and architects that the 
physical forms of our cities are changing because of the 
way we understand and traverse through them. It is believed 
that part of this change is due to the advent of global 
positioning systems (GPS) that guide a traveler from one 
part of the city to another without their ever having to 
realize what roads or paths are taken. In this paper, we 
attempt to examine the effects of the use of a GPS versus a 
road map in a navigation task through an urban 
environment. Through this study, we look to find out if, 
indeed, the use of GPS is diminishing one’s spatial 
awareness of an urban environment, and if so, in what 
manner and to what extent the understanding of a city is 
affected. 
There is considerable evidence from cognitive neuroscience 
[1,4,18,20] that people process sensory information along 
two distinct, parallel pathways: a “where” pathway, 
concerned with spatial and functional information about the 
environment, and a “what” pathway, focusing on object 
recognition and semantic knowledge.  In the case of a 
person attempting to navigate an urban environment, we 
propose that the stream of “where” information forms a 
cognitive map of their surroundings, while the “what” 
pathway collects semantic information in a network 
structure. 
Cognitive maps are allocentric, iconic and graphic. They 
are represented in the literature by soliciting sketch maps 
from users in either familiar or new situations. Cognitive 
maps are to be distinguished from Euclidian maps by being 
less scientifically absolute  (and therefore more subjective), 
and by simplifying the idiosyncratic graphic features more 
or less in accordance with the tenets of perceptual 
psychology to reduce cognitive load. 
Semantic information is perspectival, metaphorical and 
verbal. It is represented in the literature by lists of elements 
that are related categorically and hierarchically. The 
categories of the semantic information can be preset and 
communal, but can also arise from individual or group 
understanding of the environment. The categories of 
semantic information serve to reduce complexity and 
cognitive load. 
Obviously, neither road maps nor GPS are themselves 
cognitive maps or semantic information, although the 
geographic overview of road maps is linked to cognitive 
maps and the step by step instructions of the GPS are linked 
to semantic information.  Both require processing by the 
user, and the nature and difficulty of that processing is the 
focus of this study. 
 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2009,   April 4–9, 2009, Boston, MA, USA. 
Copyright 2009 ACM  978-1-60558-246-7/08/04…$5.00 
       
Figure 1. Routes traveled through the urban environment. Route A (left). Route B (right). 
Our work attempts to quantitatively and qualitatively 
measure the geospatial and semantic effects on a user’s 
spatial understanding of the environment when using a GPS 
device or a road map in an urban car navigation task. We 
hypothesize that a road map is more effective in assisting 
the formation of the geospatial information, whereas a GPS 
device is more useful for understanding the semantic 
aspects of the environment. 
To validate our hypothesis, we designed a within-subject 
experiment involving 18 participants driving routes in the 
university area of Charlotte, NC. Each participant is 
randomly given two preselected routes. They use either a 
GPS device or a road map for each route (see Figure 1). 
Upon completion of each navigation session, participants 
were asked to complete a series of recall questions. Based 
on the results of our study, we conclude that a road map is 
indeed superior to a GPS device in assisting the formation 
of a geospatial cognitive map. However, in gaining 
semantic information of an environment we find GPS and 
maps to be equally effective but in different ways: GPS 
tends to provide a diverse understanding of semantic 
elements, whereas road maps provide a more structured and 
focused understanding. 
In the rest of this paper, we will introduce research in the 
cognitive science and neuroscience fields that form the 
basis of our investigation of geospatial and semantic 
understandings. A more detailed description of our 
experiment on GPS vs. maps will be presented afterwards, 
followed by the results of our study. Finally, we discuss the 
potential implications of our findings and present the 
necessary future steps to better understand the roles of 
geospatial and semantic understanding of an urban 
environment in navigation. 
RELATED WORK 
Relevant literature to our work covers many research fields, 
therefore we parse this discussion into these areas: 
navigation, cognitive mapping and geospatial 
understanding, and semantic information. 
Navigation 
Burnett and Lee conducted a navigation study to analyze a 
person’s ability to build cognitive maps [3]. Using a driving 
simulator, they studied a person’s memory when using a 
paper map or voice-automated direction guidance. As one 
method of analysis, they use scene recognition, where 
participants placed scenes from the route in sequential 
order. Second, they use a categorization scheme proposed 
by Appleyard [2] to evaluate sketch maps based on their 
complexity. Their findings indicate those who use voice-
automated guidance have worse memory of the area than 
those who use a traditional printed map method. While this 
may prove there are differences in recall using various 
navigational methods, there is some subjectivity in this 
categorization process. In addition, this study does not 
utilize a real life navigation environment. One can assume 
that irregularities in the natural geographic environment 
contribute to our cognitive map development and are 
important to our real life perception of space. 
Recent work at the University of Tokyo [9] investigates the 
effectiveness of a GPS device in comparison to a paper map 
and to direct experience when walking urban routes. 
Among many things, their study showed GPS users travel 
more slowly, make larger direction errors, and draw poorer 
topological sketch maps than those who use a map or direct 
experience. As a result, they conclude that GPS is 
ineffective to use when navigating as compared to other 
methods. While some of these findings are similar to ours, 
we noticed a significant difference in our performance 
 3
measures; perhaps a result of navigation on foot versus in-
car. 
Cognitive Mapping & Geospatial Understanding 
The term cognitive map was first used by psychologist 
Edward Tolman (1948) in Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men 
[16].  He describes a maze previously mastered by rats that 
is blocked at a critical point and replaced by a series of 
radially arranged alternatives. His finding is that the rats 
greatly preferred the route that demonstrated an 
understanding of the spatial overview of the maze. Partly a 
reaction against strict behaviorism, his work leads directly 
to the development of cognitive psychology.  
Kevin Lynch’s book Image of the City develops the idea of 
a mental map from the viewpoint of urban theory [13]. 
Based on empirical studies of sketch maps by residents of 
Boston, Jersey City, and Los Angeles, Lynch develops a set 
of categories, including paths, edges, nodes, districts and 
landmarks, that are used in understanding and wayfinding 
through these urban environments. Lynch’s work has been 
seminal not just within urban studies, but also in a wide 
variety of fields as an example of an underlying cognitive 
process. We relate to Lynch’s work by not only how 
humans perceive the environment through simplified 
cognitive elements, but also how these elements have some 
resemblance to those recalled by our participants.  
Tversky [18] found that when elements are located relative 
to each other, they are remembered as more aligned relative 
to a reference frame than they actually are. For example, a 
majority of subjects preferred maps in which North 
America and Europe appear in greater east-west alignment. 
Findings suggest people distort mental representations of 
the environment based on the north-south east-west axes of 
the world as a process of simplification to reduce the 
cognitive workload.  
Semantic Information 
A few investigations have studied the environment in not 
only a spatial manner, but also using semantic information 
[7,8,14]. Semantic information, in this discussion, refers to 
a specific type of knowledge representation where objects 
or elements (in our case, in the environment) have some 
implied relationship with one another. This type of 
knowledge representation develops when the brain 
organizes information. For many, this involves associating 
elements as clusters or hierarchical structures.  
One experiment that shows evidence of semantic clustering 
is that of Hirtle and Mascolo. By using a sorting task based 
on names of landmarks, they found participants commonly 
grouped landmarks in a government cluster (court house, 
town hall, police station, post office, bank) and a recreation 
cluster (playground, pool, golf course, dock, beach) [8].  
Similarly, Hirtle and Jonides [7] found that people cluster 
landmarks based on nonspatial attributes. Subjects in the 
study completed a memorization task on city landmarks in 
Ann Arbor. By noting the order in which landmarks are 
recalled, they were able to develop a hierarchical tree for 
each subject. In each case, they found that subjects showed 
clustering bias, rating within-cluster pairs as closer together 
than equally distant between-cluster pairs. 
Work conducted by Mohan and Kashyap exposes the 
semantic information in a hierarchical schema they refer to 
as the relational model. This model is able to show 
semantic information as one-to-many relationships 
(resulting in tree structures) and well as many-to-many 
relationships (resulting in lattice and network structures). 
Through a process of sub-classing, they classify objects 
such as country, state, county, and city into a hierarchy 
[14]. 
The research discussed covers a range of well-defined 
interests relating to cognitive processes. Although some of 
these studies may not directly relate or reflect the intentions 
of our study, they ultimately serve as the founding scientific 
investigations that influence the design and methodology of 
our work. 
USER EXPERIMENT 
This paper investigates mental representations of the 
environment based on car navigation. Recent studies focus 
on performance and usability of navigational aids [5,14], 
whereas our study aims to uncover differences in cognitive 
maps using two common methods: a conventional road map 
and a GPS device. We aim our study to uncover mental 
representations through different perceptual and cognitive 
processes.  
Participants 
Twenty college students (10 men and 10 women) 
participated in the experiment. Participants’ ages ranged 
from 18 to 45. To ensure the results were consistent, it was 
important that the participants had no prior knowledge of 
the environment during navigation. Two of twenty 
participants said they were familiar with the routes and 
were eliminated from the experiment.  
Study Area and Routes 
Participants were observed while navigating two routes, one 
with a road map and one with a GPS device. Route A and 
Route B (see Figure 1) are similar in geographic 
surroundings, each approximately six miles in entire length, 
and have the same number of turns in the route. Both routes 
consist of three segments which the driver navigated one 
after another. Once the driver finished the first segment, 
they started the second segment from the ending point of 
the first segment. The third segment lead the driver back to 
the starting point of the first segment. Participants were 
informed of the route to follow by a highlighted area on the 
road map or by a pre-programmed destination in the GPS 
device. The order of which navigation method and which 
route to navigate was chosen at random.  
  
Figure 2. Sketch map comparison across the two methods drawn by the same subject.
Environmental Factors 
To control for environmental variables, traffic flow and 
weather conditions were taken into consideration. 
Participants were only asked to navigate during low traffic 
periods of the day, reducing the possibility of the 
participant to experience heavy traffic conditions. To ensure 
that the participant had clear visibility, weather conditions 
were monitored to eliminate the possibility of precipitation.  
GPS Navigation 
All participants used the same GPS navigation system 
(Garmin Nuvi 760) mounted in the vehicle. The system 
provided the user with a three-dimensional egocentric view 
that dynamically updated as the user moved through space. 
In addition, the GPS device provided voice automated 
directions to assist the user when navigating. Participants 
were given no time to review the route before navigation; 
although they were given time to ask questions about how 
the device performs. All three destinations for each of the 
two routes were pre-programmed in the GPS device, 
making it readily available to reuse for each participant. 
Road Map Navigation 
All participants were given a traditional road map at the 
beginning of each navigation (three maps per route, one per 
segment). Each map showed a highlighted route for 
participants to follow clearly marked with the starting point 
and the final destination. Participants were given time to 
review their relative position and the destination before 
navigation.  
Procedure 
Participants were first asked to complete a pre-experiment 
questionnaire and the Santa Barbara Sense of Direction 
Scale [6] providing data about their prior experience of 
navigating a vehicle using various methods (road map, GPS 
device, and written directions). They were then reviewed by 
the observer to have meet all inclusionary criteria (valid 
drivers license, no prior route knowledge) for the study. 
After completion of the pre-experiment questionnaire, the 
participant was asked to navigate one of the two routes (all 
three segments). Participants were guided to the starting 
point and informed of which method (GPS or road map) to 
use and when to begin. Upon arriving at the final 
destination, they were guided by the observer to a 
controlled room and asked to answer a post-experiment 
questionnaire (see following sub-section) based on recall 
questions pertaining to the route.  Participants were given 
no time limitation to complete the questions; on average it 
took each participant 35 minutes. In addition to the post-
experiment questionnaire, the investigator recorded field 
observations (length of time to navigate, number of turn 
mistakes made). After the participant completed the 
questions, they were asked to complete the other route 
using the other navigational aid. Upon arrival at the final 
destination they were again guided to the study room and 
asked the same series of questions. Once the questions were 
complete, the participant was finished with the study. 
Post-Experiment Questionnaire 
The post-experiment questionnaire consists of a series of 
recall exercises including a sketch map, element recall and 
grouping, written direction recall, and scene recognition. 
Participants were informed that they could use as much 
time as needed to complete the questions.  
The sequence of the questionnaire was designed such that 
participants were not likely to form a bias from one 
question to the next. We discuss the questions in specific 
areas: geospatial information, semantic information, 
geospatial and semantic information combined, and scene 
recognition.  
Geospatial Information We first asked participants to draw a 
sketch map of the trip they took, including all elements they 
were able to remember (see Figure 2). Once this was  
Road Map                                                                               GPS 
 5
 
Figure 3. The difference in sketch map accuracy between the two conditions is often dramatic.  Here we show the number of 
correct map elements (turns, road segments, and road names) for each of our 18 valid participants between the two conditions.  
There are only three cases when a participant produced a more correct sketch map in the GPS condition. 
  Road map GPS     
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t Sig. (2-tailed) 
Total Elements 38.22 9.87 31.67 9.15 2.94 0.002** 
Correct Elements 28.78 10.09 22.39 8.44 3.37 0.004** 
Incorrect Elements 2.72 5.20 4.67 5.85 -1.1 0.288 
Missing Elements 9.67 9.88 16.17 8.49 -3.64 0.002** 
** p < .01             
Table 1. We measured the accuracy of a participant’s sketch map by manually counting the number of correct, incorrect, and 
missing turns, road segments, and road names, as well as the number of landmarks participants spontaneously drew on the map. 
We summed these values together for overall measures of complexity (total elements), accuracy (correct elements), and errors 
(incorrect and missing elements). Based on a two-tailed paired-response t-test, we found that participants made more complex and 
accurate sketch maps after using a road map, and had fewer missing elements.   
completed, they were given another set of questions. With 
the initial sketch map drawn by the participant in hand, they 
were asked to specify locations where they remembered 
taking a turn, the length of each segment, and how much 
time it took to complete each segment. The next 
investigation was that of written directions. We asked 
participants to write down the route they just took as though 
they were giving someone a set of step-by-step directions. 
Semantic Information This section covers element recall and 
element groupings similar to methods performed by Hirtle 
and Mascolo [8]. Participants first were asked to list as 
many things as they could remember during the trip on 
index cards (one card per item remembered). They were 
also informed that this exercise could cover a broad range 
of items (small or large). Following this element recall, 
participants were asked to group the elements (index cards) 
by how they believed the elements can be related to each 
other. 
Geospatial and Semantic Information Combined Using the 
aforementioned index cards, we asked participants to group 
the elements (index cards) by where they thought the 
elements were located spatially. Second, participants were 
asked to place each element listed on the index cards onto 
the sketch map they produced using a numbering method.  
Scene Recognition Participants were shown a total of nine 
photographs taken along the route (two photographs were 
not actually along the route and served as dummy scenes). 
First, they were asked how many of the scenes they 
recognized. Then they were asked to place the scenes they 
recognized in the order they viewed them when driving.  
RESULTS  
We evaluated the results of this experiment on two major 
dimensions: accuracy in geospatial recall and qualities of 
semantic recall. Our geospatial analysis was primarily 
based on the sketch maps produced by participants, while 
our analysis of semantic memory was based largely on the 
index cards participants generated to describe objects and 
impressions they remembered from the route. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all statistical tests employ a two-tailed 
paired-response t-test to measure within-subject differences.  
We consider tests with a p value less than .05 to be 
statistically significant. 
Of the 18 participants, nine were female and nine were 
male.  Ages ranged from 18 to 45, with an average age of 
23.44.  The number of years participants had lived in the 
city where the experiment took place ranged from zero to 
33, with an average residence length of 4.31 years. 
Participants’ mean score on the Santa Barbara Sense of 
Direction scale was 3.45, which is below the scale’s 
reported mean of 4.7 [6].   
We found no significant differences in any of the following 
measures based on gender.  There were also no significant 
correlations between these measures and age or length of 
residence.  The Santa Barbara Sense of Direction Scale did 
not positively correlate with any of our measures of 
accuracy, although it showed a significant negative 
correlation with a participant’s ability to correctly place 
index cards on the sketch map (R(16) = -.47, p = .047). 
There was no apparent training effect between the two  
   Road map GPS     
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t Sig. (2-tailed) 
Correct road names 5.29 2.91 3.41 2.60 2.08 0.054 
Number of missing 
turns 4.41 3.73 7.24 2.91 -1.83 0.086 
Table 2. Participants also produced a set of written directions that measured their recall of the route without being directly linked 
to a geospatial structure. In this case, we did not find significant differences between the two groups, although in the road map 
condition, a trend toward more correct road names and fewer missing turns approaches significance. While road maps may still 
offer an advantage in sequential recall, it is less dramatic than the advantage in reproducing geospatial layout. 
 
Figure 4. There is a marked difference between the two conditions in the proportion of certain common semantic observations.  For 
each participant, we show the semantic (index card) characteristics across both methods.  The total height of the bar shows the 
total number of index cards generated, while the lighter-colored area of each bar shows the number of index cards which contained 
one of the eight most common observations.  This proportion of common elements tends to be much higher in the road map 
condition, more focused semantic recall. 
  Road map GPS     
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t Sig. (2-tailed) 
Number of index cards 10.50 6.10 9.56 4.06 0.57 0.578 
Common index cards 3.28 2.29 1.83 1.10 2.78 0.013* 
Unique index card % 65.99% 21.45% 78.51% 16.53% -2.25 0.038* 
Total placed cards 9.89 6.55 8.17 4.56 1.06 0.303 
 Correct placement % 93.77% 11.87% 84.61% 17.22% 2.15 0.047* 
* p < .05             
Table 3. To understand the differences in semantic recall between the two methods, we analyzed the index cards on which 
participants noted objects and impressions they remembered along the route. While there was no difference in the number of index 
cards that participants produced, index cards in the road map condition were significantly more likely to contain one of the eight 
most common observations. The percentage of cards that contained a more unique observation was significantly higher in the GPS 
condition, suggested a greater variety of semantic memory. On the other hand, when asked to place the index cards on the sketch 
map they had drawn, participants in the road map condition were more likely to accurately recall the position of these 
observations. 
sessions, as we found no significant differences on any of 
our measures between the first and second sessions. 
Geospatial Accuracy 
In general, the use of road maps was consistently found to 
be associated with superior geospatial recall.  As we 
hypothesized, the sketch maps produced in the road map 
condition were significantly more correct and thorough than 
those produced in the GPS condition.  We calculated the 
accuracy of sketch maps by counting the number of turns, 
road segments, and road names that correctly correspond to 
the actual route, as well as those which were incorrect or 
missing.  These values were then summed to produce an 
overall number of correct, incorrect, and missing elements 
on each sketch map.  Comparing these accuracy measures 
between the two conditions shows a strong advantage for 
road maps (see Figure 3).  Sketch maps produced in the 
road map condition contained more correct elements, more 
total elements, and fewer missing elements (Table 1). There 
was no significant difference in the number of incorrect 
elements between the two conditions. These findings 
strongly suggest that, although GPS navigation tends to be 
faster and less prone to errors, there is a distinct advantage 
to road map usage in enhancing geospatial memory of an 
urban environment.   
In reproducing a set of written directions, users in the road 
map condition tended to remember more road names 
correctly and had fewer missing turns, although both of 
these effects were shy of significance (Table 2). This 
suggests that the advantages of the road map do not apply 
nearly as strongly when users recall route information 
sequentially rather than spatially. 
 7
 
 
 
Figure 5. The process of clustering index cards on sketch maps 
for analysis of placement. This sketch map shows a participant 
using GPS navigation on Route A. Participants were asked to 
place the elements (listed on their index cards) onto the sketch 
map they drew. The cards were labeled with numbers by the 
observer (a). We then scaled each map to a standard size for 
comparison. The  position of each index card is recorded as a 
point (b). Finally, we perform adaptive k-means clustering to 
place each point into a cluster based on its position (c). Points 
of the same color have been clustered together, and X marks 
the centroid of each cluster. 
Semantic Recall 
We measured semantic recall by analyzing the index cards 
participants produced describing objects and impressions 
along the route.  While neither method was clearly superior 
in this respect, the differences between the two suggest that 
GPS navigation leads to a broader but less clearly organized 
semantic memory, while the use of a road map leads to a 
more structured and focused semantic memory.   
Between the two methods, there was no clear difference in 
the number of index cards produced.  There was also no 
difference in the number of categories participants placed 
the cards in when asked to group them semantically or 
spatially. 
We did, however, find a significant difference in the type of 
information recalled.  In order to study the amount of 
unique detail in participants’ semantic recall, we tallied the 
number of times each index card observation was repeated 
by any participant in either route and marked those 
observations that appeared ten or more times as being 
highly common.  This list included three frequently noted 
landmarks (the bookstore that served as the starting and 
ending point, the university, and the railroad tracks crossed 
on both routes) and five common generic observations 
(pedestrians, gas stations, churches, stoplights, and 
apartment complexes).  By removing these observations, 
we were able to calculate the percentage of index cards that 
reflected relatively more unique observations (see Figure 
4). This percentage was found to be significantly higher in 
the GPS condition than in the road map condition (Table 3).  
This suggests a greater breadth of semantic recall in the 
GPS case.   
Semantic and Geospatial Recall Combined 
We had two measures of how participants combined 
semantic and geospatial information: the groupings of index 
cards by location, and the placement of index cards on the 
sketch map. As mentioned, we found no difference in the 
number of categories participants produced when asked to 
group their index cards by location. However, we did find 
differences in how participants placed index cards on the 
sketch map they had drawn. We analyzed the correctness of 
the index card placement and found that participants in the 
road map case tended to place objects correctly more often 
(Table 3), indicating a better sense of the location of 
semantic elements in the road map condition.   
There were also broader differences in the way that 
participants placed the index cards.  We analyzed these 
trends in placement by marking the positions of all cards 
placed on the sketch maps, normalizing the maps to a 
constant size of 3200 by 2400 pixels, and clustering the 
index cards by location using an adaptive k-means 
clustering algorithm with a distance threshold of 500 pixels 
(see Figure 5). This provides a quantitative overview of 
whether participants place index cards evenly across the 
map, or concentrate them in a smaller number of locations. 
There is a slight trend towards participants producing more 
clusters of index cards in the road map condition, although 
this difference does not reach significance (Table 4).  
However, index cards in the GPS condition have a  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
   Road map GPS     
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t Sig. (2-tailed) 
Number of clusters 4.94 1.39 4.00 1.33 -1.77 0.094 
Points per cluster 2.39 0.79 2.78 1.18 1.29 0.216 
Average distance to cluster 
center 182.78 38.50 227.94 62.36 -3.175 0.006** 
** p < .01             
Table 4. We analyze general differences in the placement of index cards on the sketch map by clustering the points by distance. 
Participants in the road map case tend to have slightly more clusters than in the GPS condition, although this effect does not reach 
significance. However, clusters of index cards in the GPS condition tend to be much sparser, as indicated by the greater average 
distance between individual cards and the center of the cluster to which they belong. This suggests that index cards in the GPS case 
are placed in a less organized fashion than the more structured (and correct) placement in the road map condition. 
  Road map GPS     
Dependant variable Mean S.D. Mean S.D. t Sig. (2-tailed) 
Correct scenes 6.00 1.06 5.82 0.95 0.72 0.484 
Correctly ordered 
scenes 3.76 1.55 3.82 1.71 -0.10 0.918 
Table 5. Unlike Burnett and Lee [3], we did not find any difference between GPS and road map navigation in helping participants 
to accurately recall scenes they saw along the route. A key difference between our study and theirs is their use of a virtual 
environment, in which the environment was fairly abstract and landmarks tended to be obvious. Our failure to replicate this 
finding suggests that the effect may not extend to a real-world urban environment. 
Figure 6.  The same participant produces very different index card layouts in the road map and the GPS conditions. In the GPS 
condition, index cards are scattered across the sketch map, while they are tightly clustered in the road map condition.  This 
suggests a more focused semantic memory for a few specific areas in the road map condition.
significantly higher average distance from the cluster’s 
center, suggesting more spread-out placement (see Figure 
6). 
Taken together, these findings suggest a scattershot 
memory for the spatial locations of semantic observations 
after using GPS for navigation.  Road map users seem to 
hold a more robust connection between semantic and 
geospatial information, while the scattered placement of 
index cards in the GPS case suggests less structured recall.   
Scene Recognition 
Unlike Burnett and Lee [3], we did not find a significant 
difference between the two conditions in terms of scene 
images recognized or whether participants ordered the 
recognized scenes correctly (Table 5). A curious finding is 
that, in the road map condition only, we found a significant 
negative correlation between the number of correct 
elements in the sketch map and the number of correctly 
recognized scenes (R(16) = -0.48, p = 0.04). No such 
relationship existed in the GPS condition.  A possible 
explanation for this finding is that participants who 
Road Map                                                                                GPS
 9
successfully fit route information to an allocentric 
geospatial structure may have been less adept at adopting 
an egocentric view when recalling the route. 
While many of our findings reflected the study performed 
by Burnett and Lee, the difference in scene recognition 
indicates a noteworthy difference between their study using 
a simulated driving test and our study using real world 
environment.  Although there are many more factors to 
control in a navigation experiment in the real world than in 
a simulator, we find that results from a real world 
experiment are particularly significant due to the 
complexity of the real world.  Specifically, the images used 
in the scene recognition portion of Burnett and Lee’s study 
show a virtual environment that is flat with few buildings 
and trees. It is therefore not surprising that it is easier for 
their participants to recognize images and scenes in the 
environment. In our experiment, the participants are driving 
through an urban environment that is lively and complex, 
and therefore more difficult for the participants to 
remember accurately. 
While our results overall show a clear advantage for road 
maps over GPS for recalling purely spatial information after 
a navigation task, the recollection of semantic knowledge 
shows a less straightforward pattern between the two 
methods. While neither method has a clear advantage in 
semantic recall, there is evidence that road maps encourage 
recollection that is more accurately linked to geospatial 
positions, while GPS is associated with a broader range of 
semantic observations.   
DISCUSSION 
This quantitative analysis provides a basis to our 
understanding of the relationships between maps, GPS, and 
geospatial and semantic understanding of an urban 
environment. Our findings resonate with studies in 
cognitive and neuroscience literature in that we have clearly 
found a dissociation between semantic and geospatial recall 
in the context of navigation in an urban environment, 
analogous to the distinction between “what” and “where” 
knowledge in neuroscience.  
The most intriguing aspect of our study, however, is in 
indicating that there is a relationship between geospatial 
and semantic understanding. While the concept is not new, 
there has been limited or no clear evidence on how the two 
pathways relate to one another in understanding urban 
environments. In our study, we directly combine geospatial 
and semantic information by asking the participants to 
group semantic elements (index cards) geographically and 
to place the semantic elements onto a geographical 
representation (sketch map).  The results of the latter step 
indicate that there is indeed a relationship between the two. 
The question is how the two intersect, reinforce, or hinder 
each other. Although we do not have a definitive answer, 
the results from our study seem to suggest that a better 
cognitive map (geospatial understanding) gives a more 
solid foundation on which to place semantic elements. 
However, we do not find clear evidence that supports a 
good categorization of semantic elements leading to a better 
geospatial understanding of the environment. 
Lastly, it is relevant to note that as a driving aid, a GPS is 
superior to a road map.  Participants in the navigation task 
made more mistakes and wrong turns using a map than a 
GPS.  Interestingly enough, in the case of using a map, the 
more mistakes a participant made, the more accurate his 
sketch map was.  Presumably, this is due to the fact that 
more cognitive effort is put into understanding the correct 
routes.  Unfortunately, we were not able to test if the same 
is true for the GPS users, because only one participant made 
a mistake using a GPS during our experiment.  It will be 
interesting to design further experiments to see if the reason 
that the road map has a more positive effect than GPS on 
the participants’ recall of geospatial information is only due 
to the amount of cognitive effort involved, and not related 
to the egocentric or allocentric perspectives on the 
environment. 
FUTURE WORK 
As mentioned previously, the relationship between 
geospatial and semantic understanding for awareness in an 
urban environment is unclear. While we maintain our 
hypothesis that a solid geospatial foundation can act as a 
framework in which semantic elements can be incorporated, 
we still have little evidence to support this claim. We will 
need to design more specific experiments in order to further 
support or refute our hypothesis. 
At a more fundamental level, we have assumed that a 
participant’s cognitive map of an environment is 
quantitatively measureable by analyzing their sketch map 
during recall. However, it is possible that this quantitative 
measurement does not capture all aspects of a person’s 
spatial awareness of the environment. A “good” sketch map 
that assists in a person’s navigation often does not require 
memory of very intricate details of the environment. Often, 
a general understanding of the layout of the space should 
suffice. How to qualitatively distinguish between a good 
and a bad sketch map remains an area of research that we 
would like to pursue. 
Lastly, our study has indicated that maps and GPS are 
useful for different aspects of understanding an urban 
environment. However, with the GPS being the more 
accurate aid in navigation, there is a clear advantage to 
using a GPS over road maps in everyday situations.  We 
would therefore like to identify the reasons behind why 
maps are more useful for certain tasks, and investigate 
possible ways to improve the GPS interface such that its 
user will have all the benefits of using a GPS as well as the 
advantage in geospatial recall from using a map. It is 
possible that the ease-of-use nature of a GPS is the reason 
behind its user’s diminished ability to recall geospatial 
information, but we would like to perform experiments to 
better understand the relationship between the two. 
 CONCLUSION 
Technology is constantly changing the ways through which 
we understand and interact with our environments. In this 
paper, we present our experiment on comparing a GPS and 
a road map by measuring geospatial and semantic recall of 
18 participants in a navigation task through an urban 
environment. We conclude that using a road map is the 
more effective method for geospatial understanding. For 
semantic understanding, GPS users have a broader range of 
recall than road map users. Finally, when combining 
geospatial information with semantic information, road map 
users retain a more accurate, but more focused, memory of 
the placement of the semantic elements than GPS users.  
The results of our study suggest that there is indeed a 
relationship between geospatial and semantic pathways of 
processing sensory input in a navigation task. Although 
there is not a clear indication to what the relationship 
between the two is or how they interact with each other, our 
finding is nevertheless significant in increasing awareness 
as to how GPS and maps are affecting the ways in which 
we understand our environments.  
REFERENCES 
1. Aguirre, G.K. and D'Esposito, M. Environmental 
knowledge is subserved by separable dorsal/ventral 
neural areas.  Journal of Neuroscience 17, 7 (1997),  
2512-2518. 
2. Appleyard, D.A. Styles and methods of structuring a 
city. Environment and Behavior 2 (1970), 100-116. 
3. Burnett, G.E. and Lee, K. The effect of vehicle 
navigation systems on the formation of cognitive maps. 
In Traffic and Transport Psychology: Theory and 
Application, ed. G. Underwood, 2005. 
4. Goodale, M.A. and Milner, A.D. Separate visual 
pathways for perception and action. Trends in 
Neuroscience 15, 1 (1992), 20-5. 
5. Graf, S., Spiessl, W., Schmidt, A., Winter, A. and 
Rigoll, G. In-car interaction using search-based user 
interfaces. In Proc. CHI 2008, ACM Press (2008), 
1685-1688. 
6. Hegarty, M., Richardson, A.E., Montello, D., Lovelace, 
K., Subbiah I. Development of a self-report measure of 
environmental spatial ability. Intelligence 30, 5 (2002), 
425-447. 
7. Hirtle, S.C. and Jonides, J. Evidence of hierarchies in 
cognitive maps. Memory & Cognition 13, 3 (1985), 208-
217. 
8. Hirtle, S.C. and Mascolo, M.F. Effect of Semantic 
Clustering on the Memory of Spatial Locations. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology 12, 2 (1986), 182-189. 
9. Ishikawa, T., Fujiwara, H., Osamu, I. and Okabe, A. 
Wayfinding with a GPS-based mobile navigation 
system: A comparison with maps and direct experience. 
Journal of Environmental Psychology 28  (2008), 74-82. 
10.Kaas, J.H. and Hackett, T.A. "What" and "where" 
processing in auditory cortex. Nature Neuroscience 2, 
12 (2000), 1045-1047. 
11.Leshed, G., Velden, T., Rieger, O., Kot, B. and Sengers, 
P. In-Car GPS Navigation: Engagement with and 
Disengagement from the Environment. In Proc. CHI 
2008, ACM Press (2008), 1675-1684. 
12.Lobben, A.K. Tasks, Strategies, and Cognitive 
Processes Associated With Navigational Map Reading: 
A Review Perspective. The Professional Geographer, 
56, 2 (2004), 270-281. 
13.Lynch, K. Image of the City. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA, USA, 1960. 
14.Mohan, L. and Kashyap, R.L. An Object-Oriented 
Knowledge Representation for Spatial Information. In 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 14, 5 
(1988), 675-681. 
15.Patel, K., Chen, M., Smith, I., and Landay, J. 
Personalizing Routes. In Proc. of the 19th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 
ACM Press (2006), 187-190. 
16.Tolman, E.C. Cognitive Maps in Rats and Man, 
Psychological Review 55 (1948), 189-208. 
17.Tversky, B. Distortions in memory for maps. Cognitive 
Psychology 13 (1981), 407-433. 
18.Tversky, B. How to get around by mind and body:  
Spatial thought, spatial action. In Cognition, evolution, 
and rationality: A cognitive science for the XXIst 
century, ed. A. Zilhao. Routledge, London, 2005. 
19.Tversky, B. and Lee. U. Pictorial and Verbal Tools for 
Conveying Routes. In Proc. of the International 
Conference on Spatial Information Theory: Cognitive 
and Computational Foundations of Geographic 
Information Science, 1661 (1999),51-64.  
20.Ungerleider, L. and J. Haxby. What and where in the 
human brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 4, 
(1994), 157-165. 
 
 
 

