HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 1
How Visualization Layout Relates to Locus of
Control and Other Personality Factors
Caroline Ziemkiewicz, Member, IEEE, Alvitta Ottley, R. Jordan Crouser, Ashley Rye Yauilla,
Sara L. Su, Member, IEEE, William Ribarsky, Member, IEEE, and Remco Chang, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Existing research suggests that individual personality differences are correlated with a user’s speed and accuracy in
solving problems with different types of complex visualization systems. We extend this research by isolating factors in personality
traits as well as in the visualizations that could have contributed to the observed correlation. We focus on a personality trait
known as “locus of control” (LOC), which represents a person’s tendency to see themselves as controlled by or in control of
external events. To isolate variables of the visualization design, we control extraneous factors such as color, interaction, and
labeling. We conduct a user study with four visualizations that gradually shift from a list metaphor to a containment metaphor and
compare the participants’ speed, accuracy, and preference with their locus of control and other personality factors. Our findings
demonstrate that there is indeed a correlation between the two: participants with an internal locus of control perform more poorly
with visualizations that employ a containment metaphor, while those with an external locus of control perform well with such
visualizations. These results provide evidence for the externalization theory of visualization. Finally, we propose applications of
these findings to adaptive visual analytics and visualization evaluation.
Index Terms—Visualization, individual differences, locus of control.
F
1 INTRODUCTION
G RAPHIC designs, such as diagrams and maps,support users in processing sensory data, rea-
soning about it, solving problems, and identifying
patterns [1]. A well-designed visualization accounts
for both the complex preattentive and cognitive pro-
cesses triggered when a user views it. The balance
of visual elements can dramatically affect the user’s
comprehension of the information presented. As a
result of separable and integral feature relationships,
using several elements in conjunction can amplify or
dampen a single element’s effect [2]. Understanding
the relations among preattentive processes, cognitive
processes, and visual interfaces is a longstanding goal
of the visual analytics community, but evaluating
interfaces in this context is difficult for many reasons.
One reason is the problem of individual differences.
Because visualizations are meant to support com-
plex thinking, they may be more sensitive to nuances
• C. Ziemkiewicz is with the Department of Computer Science, Brown
University.
E-mail: cziemki@cs.brown.edu
• A. Ottley, R.J. Crouser, and R. Chang are with the Department of
Computer Science, Tufts University.
E-mail: alivttao@cs.tufts.edu, rcrous01@cs.tufts.edu, and
remco@cs.tufts.edu
• A.R. Yauilla is with the Department of Computer Science, Winthrop
University.
E-mail: yauillaa2@mailbox.winthrop.edu
• S.L. Su is with Google, Inc.
E-mail: sara.su@google.com
• W. Ribarsky is with the Department of Computer Science, UNC
Charlotte.
E-mail: ribarsky@uncc.edu
of an individual user’s cognitive style than other
types of interfaces. This would explain findings that
show significant differences in visualization perfor-
mance based on personality. Earlier work has found
an effect from the personality dimension known as
“locus of control” [3], [4]. This dimension measures
a person’s tendency to see herself as either shaped
by or in control of external events. While the effects
of individual differences such as locus of control
have been observed, an explanation for why those
differences arise remains elusive. Early work in this
area employed real-world data exploration systems
that differed on many dimensions, including the use
of color, labeling, interaction, and layout style. Any of
these variables may contribute to the effect of locus
of control, making it difficult to apply the findings to
visualization design for different user groups.
We propose that layout style is the key variable that
determines the interaction between locus of control
and compatibility with different system designs. Our
definition of layout encompasses any differences in the
spatial arrangement and presentation of marks in a
visualization. This is to be distinguished from differ-
ences in the visual encoding, that is, how individual
data variables are mapped to individual graphical
variables, such as color or size1.
Our hypothesis is that individual differences based
on locus of control are more affected by layout in
this sense than by visual encoding or interaction style.
1. In cases where a variable is directly mapped to spatial position,
as in a scatterplot, that aspect of spatial arrangement is of course
part of the encoding. No such mapping existed in the visualizations
we study.
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 2
This hypothesis is based on the idea that locus of con-
trol can provide insight into a user’s tendency to rely
on the external representations that a visualization
employs. The overall arrangement of visual elements
in a layout is more likely to directly affect the nature
of this external representation than surface qualities
such as color and shape, or more intangible qualities
such as interaction style.
1.1 Contributions
This paper makes a number of contributions to our
understanding of how personality factors affect how
people use visualizations:
• First, we present experimental evidence to show
that visual layout is a key factor in previous
findings in individual differences. Our findings
expand previous work by showing that the effect
of locus of control can still be found when restrict-
ing visualization differences to layout factors.
• Second, we use these findings to argue for a
model of visualization use based on a user’s
adoption of external representations. Our find-
ings suggest that locus of control affects the use of
different visualization types by affecting a user’s
willingness to adapt to a novel externalization of
information. This framework places these find-
ings in the context of external representation as a
model for visualization use.
We evaluate our hypothesis in a study with 240 online
subjects who varied in their locus of control. Partici-
pants are presented with four variations of a hierarchy
visualization showing phylogenetic data (Figure 1).
These designs include a view that employs a list-like
organizational structure (V1), a view that presents the
hierarchy in a strong containment metaphor (V4), and
two designs that lie between these extremes (V2 and
V3). We hypothesize that users with a more external
locus of control are more willing to adapt their think-
ing to unfamiliar visual metaphors than those with
an internal locus of control. We show how locus of
control can predict performance on inferential task
questions using these interface designs. Specifically,
we test the hypothesis that an individual with a more
internal locus of control will show a performance de-
crease when using layouts with a strong containment
metaphor, while those with a more external locus
of control will not show this decrease. Our findings
provide evidence for the externalization model of
visualization use and can inform the design of visu-
alization interfaces adapted to an individual’s needs.
2 RELATED WORK
There is a substantial history of research in how indi-
vidual differences affect interface use in the broader
human-computer interaction field, reviewed by Dillon
and Watson [5]. A subset of this research focuses
specifically on individual differences in visualization,
driven by the belief that a reliance on visual and
spatial cognitive abilities makes individual differences
a potentially greater factor in this field. We review
findings on how cognitive differences affect visual-
ization use and discuss why locus of control is a
potentially significant factor.
2.1 Individual Differences and Visualization
Much of the existing work in the visualization field
on the impact of individual differences has focused
on the influence of perceptual ability on visualiza-
tion use. Conati and Maclaren [6] find that a user’s
perceptual speed predicts whether a star graph or
heatmap will be most effective. Similarly, Allen [7]
finds a role for perceptual speed and spatial scanning
ability in search performance. However, he found
that users do not tend to optimize their visualization
use for greater search efficiency, and proposes the
development of user models to automatically guide
users toward optimal strategies. This work shows that
perceptual abilities can affect task performance, but
suggests that the connection between these abilities
and a user’s cognitive strategies may be less direct.
Taking a more cognitive perspective, Chen [8]
found that spatial ability has no effect on participants’
search performance in a visualization of paper citation
links. Cognitive factors did, however, play a role in
users’ subjective feedback; users with high associative
memory rated the interface higher on usefulness, and
users with high spatial ability rated the tasks higher
on familiarity. Chen goes on to suggest that users with
varying cognitive abilities may be more or less likely
to impose certain kinds of mental models on data.
A related finding comes from Ziemkiewicz and
Kosara [9], who studied the role of personality and
spatial ability in a user’s ease in switching between
incompatible visual metaphors in tree visualization
use. They found that users with high spatial visu-
alization ability and a high score on the Openness
scale of the Big Five Personality Inventory [10] were
more adept at answering questions despite a verbal
metaphor that conflicted with the visual metaphor of
the visualization they were viewing. Both this work
and Chen’s suggest that users with different cognitive
styles may be more or less comfortable with adapting
their thinking to an external representation.
Tversky et al. [11], [12], [13] studied how indi-
vidual differences in ability impact the extraction of
structure and function from diagrams. They found
that participants with high ability form mental mod-
els integrating structure and function, while those
with low ability form models dominated by structure.
They suggest that structural diagrams designed for
the latter group can be annotated with functional
information for improved comprehension [14].
These findings have begun to build the case that
some individual differences in visual analytics can be
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 3
(a) V1: Basic Tree (b) V2: Bordered Tree
(c) V3: Indented Boxes (d) V4: Nested Boxes
Fig. 1. The four visualizations used in our study. Each view is showing the same portion of one of the phylogenetic
tree datasets.
attributed to a complex interaction between the men-
tal model suggested by a visual layout and the user’s
own cognitive style. However, most previous studies
that show an effect of individual differences either
examine a single system or compare two or more
systems with numerous differences. In order to apply
knowledge of individual differences to visualization
design, it is necessary to make a clearer connection
between personality groups and exactly which factors
lead them to better performance with one visualiza-
tion over another. Context for these connections can
come from psychology research on how personality
relates to problem solving and decision making.
2.2 Personality and Problem Solving
Problem solving is the process by which we bridge the
gap between the perceived and a desired outcome.
Since this process often requires complex thought,
researchers have long been investigating the effect of
personality on problem solving and decision making
processes. These investigations have identified a series
of personality traits that impact problem solving in-
cluding extraversion, neuroticism and locus of control.
For example, when approaching a problem, persons
who score high on the judgment scale of the Myers-
Briggs Personality Inventory (i.e., those who are de-
cisive and are quick at making decisions) prefer a
problem to be concise and well structured [15]. On the
other hand, persons who score high in the perceptive
scale are more concerned with seeing all sides of a
problem and prefer flexibility.
Disposition on the extraversion scale also affects
problem solving [15]. Individuals with high extraver-
sion have greater tendencies to be sociable and re-
quire engagement with others. When given a problem,
extraverts are more likely to discuss the problem in
order to ascertain clarity and understanding, while
introverts are more likely to take time and think about
the problem before they begin. This implies that intro-
verts would generally take longer before attempting
a solution but are more likely to have a well-defined
path toward finding that solution. Furthermore, in-
troverts are more likely to take time to understand
important concepts while extraverts require feedback
on the correctness of their ideas.
While extraversion and judgment can be used as a
predictor of a user’s approach to a problem, similar
tendencies can also be deduced from an individual’s
neuroticism orientation. Neuroticism measures a per-
son’s degree of emotional stability. Individuals who
score high on the neuroticism scale are more prone
to experiencing negative emotions such a stress and
anxiety. As recent study by Uziel [16] has investigated
the correlation of neuroticism and extraversion and
suggest a negative correlation between them when
affective states are considered. An individual’s neu-
roticism disposition can also be a predictor of their
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 4
(a) GVis
(b) NCBI Map Viewer
Fig. 2. The two interfaces used in Green et al.’s
study [3] of personality differences in visual analytics
use.
problem-solving approach [17]. Persons with high
measures of neuroticism are more like to have lower
perceived problem-solving skills and are less likely
to make decisions when risks are involved. More
neurotic people also take more time to solve problems,
as was found by Farley [18], who found a curvilinear
correlation between neuroticism and time spent solv-
ing a problem. Individuals who are measured on the
neuroticism scale as average are significantly faster
on problem-solving tasks than the combined low and
high scoring people.
Several studies have also established correlations
between locus of control and neuroticism [19], [20].
These traits are multidimensional constructs and are
comprised of similar traits such as anxiety and self-
esteem. It is therefore not surprising that locus of con-
trol may also affect problem solving ability and style.
Of the three personality dimensions we study, locus of
control has been found to have the most pronounced
correlation to problem solving using visualizations.
2.3 Locus of Control
Much of the direct background for this work comes
from Green et al.’s research [3], [4] on personality
factors in visual analytics use. Their work found
effects on interface performance from three psycho-
metric measures: locus of control (LOC), neuroticism,
and extraversion. Locus of control [21] measures the
degree to which a person sees herself as in control of
events (internal LOC) as opposed to seeing her fate as
controlled by outside events (external LOC).
Locus of control has been associated with a number
of significant practical outcomes. People with a more
internal LOC tend to be more effective at work [22]
and on many academic measures [23], and are more
capable of coping with stress [24]. Locus of control in
an academic setting is also associated with different
learning styles. Cassidy and Eachus [25] found a pos-
itive correlation between external LOC beliefs and a
tendency to use “surface learning” approaches, where
the student attempts to fit the demands of an assign-
ment instead of “deep learning,” which focuses on
the underlying principles being taught. On the other
hand, students with an internal locus of control were
more likely to use a deep learning approach. Such
findings suggest the possibility that locus of control
is related to how a user approaches problem-solving
tasks in a novel setting, which may explain why it
influences use of a novel visualization technique.
Green et al.’s work studied the effect of locus of con-
trol and other personality dimensions on both proce-
dural and inferential learning in a GVis, a visual ana-
lytics interface (Figure 2(a)) versus NCBI Map Viewer,
a more traditional web interface (Figure 2(b)). The
procedural tasks they studied involved searching for
a specific piece of information in a genomic database,
while inferential tasks were those in which a user
had to make a more open-ended comparison between
two items. In both cases, the tasks were prompted
by questions of the kind found in a typical usability
study. The findings from both experiments suggested
that the web table interface was more conducive to
answering procedural questions and the findings from
their first experiment suggest that the visual interface
is more conducive to answering inferential questions.
In the first experiment, they found that participants
with an external locus of control completed inferen-
tial tasks more quickly than those with an internal
locus. This effect was more pronounced in GVis. In
the second experiment, they studied only procedural
tasks and found that, in contrast to inferential tasks,
those with an internal locus of control completed
procedural tasks more quickly. They also found corre-
lations between the Big Five personality dimensions
of neuroticism and extraversion and completion times
for search tasks. More neurotic and more extraverted
participants were significantly faster at finding the
target of a search task in both interfaces.
In these studies, there were differences not only
between interface structures but also between their
interaction techniques. For example, GVis used a drill-
down zooming technique while Map Viewer used
a menu-driven interaction technique. In our work,
we build upon these findings by seeking to isolate
the factors of the interface structure that cause the
different effects between those with an internal or
external locus of control.
The amount of data we have about how differ-
ent user types react to different interfaces is rapidly
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 5
increasing. Our goal as visualization researchers is
to make sense of this data within the context of
models of the user. In order to apply this knowledge
to improve design, we need to know not just what
differences exist between users, but why. This work is
an attempt to answer that question relative to Green
et al.’s findings on personality and interface design.
3 EXPERIMENT
Research by Green et al. [3], [4] suggests that locus of
control and other personality traits influence an indi-
vidual’s use of a complex visualization system. How-
ever, the reason for this relationship is not obvious
from previous research. We propose that rather than
an interaction between between locus of control and
specific complex visualizations, the observed pattern
may in fact be a correlation between locus of control
and visual layout.
For example, consider the nested circles used in
the GVis system from work by Green et al. [3], [4];
these structural elements are visually dominant due
to their unusual shape and large size with respect to
the surrounding textual elements. In contrast, Map
Viewer uses a more subtle indentation-based struc-
tural expression which is dominated by text. Apart
from using different visual encodings and interaction
styles, these two designs represent significantly dif-
ferent visual layouts of the same underlying data.
Exploring how those layouts differ may help explain
why locus of control interacts significantly with them.
To more closely investigate this interaction, we
conduct a comparable study in which the test visu-
alizations are more tightly controlled. We restrict the
variation between our four test interfaces to visual
layout style, holding interaction metaphor and visual
encoding consistent across all interfaces. We hypoth-
esize that, even under this simplified setting, partic-
ipants with a more internal LOC will have difficulty
with layouts that depend on a strong containment
metaphor, while participants with a more external
LOC will show a greater willingness to adapt to a
variety of visual layouts.
To test this hypothesis, we performed a user study
in which participants were asked to answer search
and inferential questions about data in four simple
hierarchy visualizations (Figure 1). The four views
were designed to express an increasingly visually ex-
plicit containment metaphor for the hierarchy, ranging
from a list-like view that only used indentation to
show hierarchical structure to a view that used large
nested rectangles. Like Green et al., we measured
personality traits of the participants beforehand in
order to test whether Locus of Control, Neuroticism,
and Extraversion affect a participant’s ability to use
these visualizations.
Green et al. [3] used two real-world systems in their
work, which has the benefit of providing a realistic
testing environment. However, this also makes it diffi-
cult to isolate exactly which aspects of the two designs
prompted the differing user behavior they found. As
the long-term goal of this work is to assist designers in
choosing how to display information for varying user
types, knowing exactly which elements of the design
should be altered is vitally important. Therefore, our
intention in designing the visualizations used in our
study was, as much as possible, to isolate the factor
of layout style which we hypothesized to be the key
to these differences.
Before viewing the data, each participant was given
a personality test, including the Locus of Control
Inventory [21] and the Neuroticism and Extraversion
scales of the Big Five Personality Inventory [26]. The
participant was then presented with a series of tasks
to perform on each visualization. The order in which
the visualizations were presented was randomized,
and the user’s ability to successfully complete tasks
using each visualization was recorded.
3.1 Participants
We recruited 240 participants over Amazon’s Mechan-
ical Turk service. Altogether, it took approximately
two days to collect data from all participants. Me-
chanical Turk is an online job market in which people
can be recruited for brief tasks and paid for their
efforts. This service has become increasingly popular
for use in online experiments, as a large number
of relatively diverse participants can be processed
very quickly [27]. Reservations remain about using
Mechanical Turk among the human-computer inter-
action and visualization communities. However, since
Mechanical Turk helps correct for a number of the
traditional limitations of online studies, such as the
possibility of vote flooding and the lack of incentive
for completion [28], it is gradually becoming more
accepted as a user study platform. It can be partic-
ularly useful in studies such as this, in which there
is a ground truth by which to measure results [29]
and the possibility of incentivizing accurate responses
through bonuses [28].
That said, some limitations remain with interpreting
online studies in general. Chief among these is envi-
ronmental control. In an online study, it is impossible
to know whether a participant’s environment is noisy
or distracting, or whether the participant is doing
something else while performing the study. While
these limitations should be kept in mind, this is a
study with a clear ground truth and a task that should
not be strongly affected by varying computing setups.
In addition, our task questions were designed not to
be answerable using a search engine. Under these
circumstances, we argue that the advantages of using
Mechanical Turk to obtain a high number of users
outweigh the potential issues.
Of the 240 participants, four did not report their age
or gender. Of the rest, there were 124 males and 112
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 6
females. Self-reported age ranged from 18 to 62, with
a mean of 26.7 (? = 9.5). Our participants reported
an average locus of control score of 3.61 (? = .59).
This is slightly lower than scores reported in other
publications that use this particular scale [30], [31]. For
example, Lapierre and Allen [31] find a mean locus
of control of 4.03 (? = .61) for a participant pool of
205 employees in various professions. This difference
may reflect the broader demographics of Mechanical
Turk workers versus participants in traditional psy-
chological studies. Locus of control in particular is
often studied in the context of work or education,
meaning the participants in these studies may have
different educational or economic backgrounds than
the general population. However, as we did not collect
such demographics from our participants, we can
only speculate on this point.
3.2 Materials
Participants were initially given two questionnaires
to measure the aspects of their personality which are
relevant to our hypotheses: a scale to measure the
Big Five personality dimensions of Extraversion and
Neuroticism and a locus of control scale to measure
the degree to which they see themselves as in control
of or controlled by external events. Both scales were
taken from the International Personality Inventory
Pool [26] and were combined to form a 40-question
survey. Neuroticism and Extraversion were included
for comparison with Green et al.’s results, although
they are not the focus of the current analysis.
Green et al.’s study used two fully functional data
exploration systems with many differences between
them. For our study, we wished to isolate as much
as possible the variable of layout style, so we created
a set of four very specific visualizations (Figure 1).
The first of these, V1 (Figure 1(a)) displays a tree
in a simplified Windows Explorer style, using only
indentation to indicate hierarchical relationships. This
is representationally similar to the webpage organi-
zation used by Map Viewer in Green et al.’s work.
The fourth view, V4 (Figure 1(d)) uses a nested boxes
display that relies heavily on the visual metaphor of
hierarchy as containment [32]. Although it uses rectan-
gles rather than circles and a very different interaction
style, this view is representationally similar to the
nested bubbles of the GVis visual analytics system.
Between these two extremes, we designed two in-
termediate views. V2 (Figure 1(b)) is very similar to
the indentation style of V1, but adds borders around
the tree nodes to suggest a containment metaphor. V3
(Figure 1(c)) breaks the strictly vertical layout style
used in V1 in favor of a horizontal layout closer
to that used in V4, but still employs indentation to
organize the levels of the hierarchy. These views are
intended to provide cases that interpolate between the
two layout styles used in Green et al. Our use of such
simplified views may raise the concern that our results
do not directly apply to more realistic visual analytics
scenarios. However, since we are partially attempting
to replicate results from a study that employed real-
world analysis systems, we feel this approach is com-
plementary to previous work. If our results are similar
to those found by Green et al, it would demonstrate
that this simplification still maintains the important
differences between the systems used in their study.
Furthermore, if a trend can be found to increase
from V1 to V4, it would show that our intermediate
views do indeed capture the major differences be-
tween the two views. Since the intermediate views
primarily differ in the degree to which they express
either a list-like or containment metaphor, this could
support our argument that the finding is largely based
on the different user groups’ willingness to adapt to
one metaphor over the other. That said, layout is a
complex factor that by nature is made up of many
dimensions. While this study design is intended to
keep these layout differences as controlled as possible,
there are like other aspects of the layout, such as data-
ink ratio or size of visual elements, which cannot be
entirely ruled out as factors. Nonetheless, this study
design can at least test whether layout factors in
general can lead to a locus of control effect without
differences in visual encoding or interaction.
Apart from these specific design differences, we
endeavored to maintain consistency between the four
views whenever possible. They all use the same font
size and folder icons. Each visualization also has the
same interaction style, based on the collapsing folders
metaphor seen in a standard desktop file system.
This may somewhat bias the results in favor of V1,
which most closely resembles the interfaces used in
file systems. Nonetheless, we argue that maintaining
interaction consistency is important enough for isolat-
ing design factors that this is worth the tradeoff.
In addition, we implemented the restriction that
only one subtree could be open at one time. If a user
expanded one branch of the hierarchy and then at-
tempted to expand a node in an unconnected branch,
the first branch would automatically collapse. This
was intended to keep the amount of potentially visible
information consistent across the four views. Having
several subtrees open is fairly easy in V1, which is
purely vertical, but it would be difficult or impossible
to open an infinite number of subtrees in V4 without
making the lower-level nodes too small to display
an entire label. Finally, to see genome data about
individual species, the participant hovered the mouse
over the species name to bring up a tooltip. Our goal
with this interaction style was to keep the four views
as consistent as possible except in how they visually
organize the space.
The datasets presented in these four visualizations
were four subsets of the full taxonomic tree from
the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 7
TABLE 1
The eight task questions seen in the study.
Dataset Question Type Question
Amphibia search Within the classification “Batrachuperus,” which species was most recently updated?inferential Under “Anura,” find the classification “Bufo” and note the subclasses it contains. There is another classification under
“Mesobatrachia” that has something notable in common with “Bufo.” Find that classification.
Aves search Under the classification “Falco,” find the species with a “Length” value over 18000.inferential Looking in “Sphenisciformes,” find the classification “Eudyptula” and note the species under it. Now look in
“Threskiornithidae” for a classification that has something notable in common with “Eudyptula.”
Eutheria search Within the classification “Tarsius,” find the species which was most recently updated.inferential Under “Caniformia,” find the classification “Canis” and note the subclasses and species it contains. Now find another
classification under “Ursidae” that has something notable in common with “Canis.”
Lepidosauria search Under the classification “Bipes,” find the species with the lowest “Length” value.inferential Within “Scincomorpha,” find the classification “Lacerta” and note the species under it. Now look in “Crotalinae” for
a classification which has something in common with “Lacerta.”
Genome database [33]. Each dataset represents a phy-
logenetic tree where leaf nodes are individual species.
At the leaf level, there is data on the genome mapping
data available for that species, such as the date the
entry was updated and the number of proteins and
genes in the database. This is similar to the data used
in Green et al., but does not include all the information
found in the Map Viewer subset of the database. We
chose to show less data at the leaf level in order to
present more data overall and more complex trees.
The four datasets had, on average, 98.75 leaf nodes
(i.e. individual species) and 114.75 non-leaf nodes in
the phylogenetic tree. There was some variety in the
branching factors and overall structure of the trees,
although this was not carefully controlled for. How-
ever, since the datasets were ultimately balanced with
respect to the view types, these differences should not
significantly affect our results.
We considered the unfamiliarity of the datasets
to be beneficial to our study, since we could trust
that participants would need to consult the views
in order to answer the task questions we presented
them. Following Green et al. [4], these questions were
divided into search tasks and inferential tasks. In
both cases, tasks took the form of questions that
participants were expected to consult the visualization
to answer. This is similar to the methodology used
in most visualization evaluation studies. These two
question types are meant to represent simple data
lookup and more complex analytical tasks, although
they are simplified versions of the real-world versions
of these tasks. We expect to see more differences in
the inferential questions, since these are more likely
to require understanding of the structure of a dataset
rather than simple navigation ability.
The search questions asked the participants to find
a single species within a classification that had a cer-
tain property. For example, “Within the classification
‘Batrachuperus,’ which species was most recently up-
dated?” The verbal metaphor for tree structure used in
these questions was varied between a levels metaphor
and containment metaphor, to avoid any potential
confound of metaphor compatibility [32]. Participants
were asked to write the name of the species they
found within a text field. The inferential questions
were more open-ended, asking the participant to find
a certain classification, then find another classification
in another part of the taxonomy that had something
in common with the first. For example:
Under “Anura,” find the classification “Bufo”
and note the subclasses it contains. There is an-
other classification under “Mesobatrachi” that has
something notable in common with “Bufo.” Find
that classification.
This was usually a similar pattern of names or
numbers of species that fell under the classification.
For example, the classification “Bufo” contained a
classification also called “Bufo,” and the correct an-
swer was another classification that contained a child
node with the same name as itself. Since correctness
may be harder to judge in questions with free text re-
sponses, participants in this case chose their response
from a list of four multiple choice answers (as well
as a “None of the Above” response). Each dataset
was associated with two task questions: one search
question and one inferential question. Participants
therefore saw eight task questions altogether (Table 1).
3.3 Procedure
After selecting the study task from the Mechanical
Turk website participants were asked to fill out a 40-
question personality scale by rating each item from
1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Once they
were done, they read instructions for the remainder
of the experiment.
The main portion of the experiment consisted of
four sessions, one with each of the four views. The
sequence in which these views were presented was
counterbalanced to prevent ordering effects. Four
datasets were randomly distributed between the four
views, such that each dataset was seen exactly once.
When they first saw the visualization, participants
were asked to familiarize themselves with the in-
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 8
terface for as long as they liked. When they were
done, they clicked on a button labeled “Start” and
were presented with the search question. They again
had unlimited time to interact with the visualization
and find the answer. When they were satisfied, they
clicked on a “Ready to Answer” button and were
presented with a text field to fill in their answer.
Interaction with the visualization was then locked
to limit the recorded response time to the actual
interaction time and ignore the time used to type in
the answer.
After answering the search question, the participant
was presented with an inferential question on the
same dataset. The procedure for the inferential ques-
tion was the same as for the search question, except
that participants were presented with a set of multiple
choice responses instead of a text field to record their
answer. The responses were presented in random
order and were not visible during the interaction
period. Once both questions were answered, partic-
ipants were shown a brief four-question preference
survey on how much they liked the visualization. The
questions in this survey were:
• This system was easy to use.
• The way this system arranged information made sense
to me.
• I understand the data better after using this system.
• I enjoyed using this system.
Participants rated how much they agreed with each
of these statements on a five-point scale. After com-
pleting all four sessions, participants were asked to
provide their age, gender, and any comments about
the study in a form on the Mechanical Turk site.
Overall, the experiment lasted approximately one
hour. We measured the time spent in the initial train-
ing period, the time taken in the interaction period,
and the time needed to record their response, as well
as whether their response was correct or incorrect.
In addition, we calculated each participant’s locus
of control, neuroticism, and extraversion based on
their personality scale responses, and averaged their
preference survey responses to generate a Preference
Score for each visualization.
4 RESULTS
The task questions proved quite challenging, with an
overall accuracy of 68.6% correct responses on search
tasks and 47.1% on inferential tasks. This, coupled
with the large amount of time spent interacting with
the views, should be kept in mind when interpret-
ing the following results. Across all participants and
question types, no view condition was more or less
difficult in terms of accuracy (?2(3, N = 1919) = 3.7,
p = .29) or correct response time (F (3, 1109) = .57,
p = .63). As our primary interest is the influence
of a participant’s personality factors, further analysis
focuses on participants grouped by personality type.
We found support for our hypothesis that participants
Grouped LOC
external LOC
average LOC
internal LOC
M
ea
n 
C
or
re
ct
 R
es
po
ns
e 
Ti
m
e
(s
ec
on
ds
)
400
300
200
100
0
V1
Basic tree
V2
Bordered 
tree
V3
Indented 
boxes
V4
Nested 
boxes
Fig. 3. Inferential task response time for correct an-
swers only across the four view conditions and three
locus of control (LOC) groups. Participants with a
highly internal LOC, who see themselves as in con-
trol of external events, were much slower than other
participants at answering inferential questions in V4,
a visualization that uses a strong nested-boxes visual
metaphor. Participants with a highly external LOC, who
see themselves as controlled by outside events, are
relatively more likely to perform quickly on V4.
with a more internal locus of control would have
more difficulty with views similar to V4. While we
found that participants with a more external locus of
control did perform very well with V4, we did not
find a corresponding trend in which their performed
decreased on views similar to V1. We found partial
support for Green et al.’s finding that more neurotic
participants would perform better with the more
explicitly structured views, but no support for the
their finding that less extraverted participants would
perform better with these views.
4.1 Effects of Locus of Control
We initially divided participants into three groups
based on their score on the Locus of Control scale.
Participants with a score lower than one standard
deviation from the mean (i.e. less than 3.01) were
classified as external LOC users. Those with a score
greater than one standard deviation from the mean
(i.e. greater than 4.21) were classified as internal LOC
users. The rest were classified as average LOC users.
The independent variables we analyzed to test our
hypothesis were Question Type (search task versus
inferential task), View Condition (V1, V2, V3, or V4),
and LOC Group (external, average, or internal). Our
overall model was therefore a 2x4x3 Univariate Anal-
ysis of Variance (ANOVA). This overall model was
significant for the variable of Correct Response Time
(F (23, 1109) = 10.67, p < .01, ?2p = .18). Correct
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 9
View Condition
V1 (basic tree)
V2 (bordered tree)
V3 (indented boxes)
V4 (nested boxes)
external LOC average LOC internal LOC
Pe
rc
en
t C
or
re
ct
 R
es
po
ns
es
60%
40%
20%
0%
80%
Fig. 4. Percentage of correct answers in both question
types across the four view conditions for participants
grouped by their locus of control score. Participants
with a more external locus of control were more ac-
curate overall, while the other groups performed poorly
with V4.
Response Time only included correct responses, and
represents only the time spent interacting with the
view, not the time spent writing or choosing a re-
sponse.
In addition, there were significant main effects of
question type (F (1, 1109) = 158.86, p < .01, ?2p = .13)
and locus of control (F (2, 1109) = 5.38, p < .01,
?2p = .01). Unsurprisingly, search questions were
answered faster than the more difficult inferential
questions. Overall, internal LOC participants were
slower at answering questions correctly (M = 183.4
seconds, SD = 11.6) than external LOC participants
(M = 147.9 seconds, SD = 10.3). There was also
a significant interaction between view condition and
question type (F (3, 1109) = 3.01, p < .05, ?2p =
.01) and between question type and LOC group
(F (2, 1086) = 5.93, p < .01, ?2p = .01). The reason for
the latter is that internal LOC participants are much
slower than the others on inferential tasks, but are
the same speed when answering search tasks. The
source of the interaction between view and question
type is that, while inferential questions were answered
more slowly than search questions in all views, this
difference was significantly larger in V3. For infer-
ential questions, V3 produced the slowest response
times of all views, but produced the fastest for search
tasks. We focus our subsequent analysis on inferential
questions, since it was on these questions that the
individual differences between participants were most
substantial.
The results relevant to our main hypothesis are
summarized in Figure 3, which shows inferential
question response times across view types and par-
ticipants grouped by locus of control. We found that
participants with an external LOC answer inferential
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
low 
neuroticism
average 
neuroticism
high 
neuroticism
V1 (basic tree)
V2 (bordered tree)
V3 (indented boxes)
V4 (nested boxes)
View Condition
Pe
rc
en
t C
or
re
ct
 R
es
po
ns
es
Fig. 5. Percentage of correct answers in both question
types across the four view conditions for participants
grouped by their neuroticism score. More neurotic par-
ticipants performed more accurately with visualizations
that used a more container-like layout, while partici-
pants in other groups displayed the opposite trend.
questions in V4 (the nested boxes) faster than other
participants, although they answer questions in V1
faster as well. Internal LOC participants show a clear
trend of slower performance from V1 to V4, although
there is no distinction for these participants between
V3 and V4. Average LOC participants show no re-
sponse time difference between the four views. We
also found that raw locus of control score correlates
significantly with correct response time on nested
boxes but no other condition (r(104) = .23, p < .05).
For search tasks, there was no significant response
time difference for any participants between the four
views.
To test overall accuracy, we used a Pearson’s chi-
square test on correctness (in both question types) and
grouped locus of control. Participants with an exter-
nal LOC answered more questions correctly overall
(?2(2, N = 1919) = 7.7, p < .05), possibly due to their
better performance on conditions V3 and V4. These
results are summarized in Figure 4.
4.2 Results by Big Five Personality Factors
As with Locus of Control, we divided participants
into high, low, and average groups for both Extraver-
sion and Neuroticism using one standard deviation
from the mean as dividing points. This split par-
ticipants into three groups based on Extraversion:
introverted (less than 2.29), average extraversion, and
extraverted (greater than 3.86). For Neuroticism, these
groups were low neuroticism (less than 2.02), average
neuroticism, and high neuroticism (greater than 3.53).
We found no overall effects of either of the two Big
Five measures on correct response time. As with LOC,
we used a Pearson’s chi-square test on correctness
and grouped personality type to test differences in
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 10
accuracy. Introverts were more accurate across all
four views and both question types than extraverts
(?2(2, N = 1919) = 34.15, p < .001). A similar effect
was found for participants with high Neuroticism
scores (?2(2, N = 1919) = 9.24, p = .01).
In addition, highly neurotic participants were sig-
nificantly more accurate than the other groups in the
high-structure V4 condition (?2(2, N = 480) = 6.12,
p < .05). In general, the more neurotic participants
seemed to answer a higher percentage of questions
accurately as views became more container-like, while
the other groups showed the opposite trend (Figure 5).
There was no equivalent significant effect for extraver-
sion. Additionally, unlike Green and Fisher [3], we
found no effect of either extraversion or neuroticism
on response time for search tasks.
4.3 Other Findings
In addition to the personality variables that we mea-
sured, we analyzed our results based on the de-
mographics and preference information we collected
from participants. According to a repeated measures
ANOVA on the preference scores for each visualiza-
tion, V1 and V2 were rated significantly more posi-
tively than V3 and V4 (F (3) = 15.09, p < .001). These
preference ratings displayed no significant correlation
with accuracy or response time. There was also no
relationship between locus of control and preference
ratings for any of the four views.
Female participants answered more questions cor-
rectly than male participants (t(231) = ?2.31, p <
.05). We found that the age of participants correlated
positively with overall response time (r(1893) = .13,
p < .001), so that older participants took more time
interacting with the interfaces. Age had no effect,
however, on accuracy, and did not correlate with any
of the personality measures. In the following sections,
we will discuss these implications of these findings for
our hypothesis and for visualization design in general.
5 DISCUSSION
Through this study, we demonstrated previously re-
ported effects of locus of control in a simplified design
that isolates layout style. This supports our main
hypothesis that the way visual elements are spatially
arranged is a significant factor of design that interacts
with locus of control. This clarifies the earlier findings
and suggests an explanation for this effect rooted in
the relationship between locus of control and use of
external representations.
5.1 Replication and Expansion of Previous Find-
ings on Locus of Control
Our results replicate those of Green et al. [3], [4] in
some cases, but not all. Error rates across the two ex-
periments are not directly comparable. In the previous
study, participants were allowed as many attempts
as needed to answer a question correctly, with each
mistake recorded as an error. However, both studies
found that participants made more errors overall in
the containment-metaphor visualization than in the
more list-like view (V1 in this study, Map Viewer
in [3], [4]). More significantly, external LOC partici-
pants in both studies responded faster to inferential
questions than internal LOC participants, particularly
in a visualization with a containment-based visual
metaphor (V4 in this study, GVis in [3], [4]).
Together, these findings provide evidence that the
effects of locus of control on visualization use can be
replicated. Users with either an internal or external
locus of control show performance differences in gen-
eral on data exploration tasks, and additionally, each
group performs better with different visualization
styles. This suggests that locus of control may be a
variable that merits further study, and that personality
differences in general may be a valuable area for
research in visualization.
We did not replicate previous findings on search
task response times. Green et al. found that internal
LOC participants responded faster to search tasks in
GVis, and that neurotic and extraverted participants
responded faster to search tasks overall. However,
completion times for these tasks included incorrect
responses and guesses made by participants, so our
response times are not directly comparable for these
questions. This was not the case for the inferential
questions, where they recorded only the time to make
a single response.
We speculate that the inferential questions forced
the users to consider the structure of the data to
a greater degree. The search questions may have
simply measured a participant’s ability to navigate the
interface quickly, while the inferential questions asked
them to characterize parts of the data in an open-
ended fashion. Participants may have interpreted
these questions in a variety of ways, allowing the
structural elements of the visualization design to play
a greater role in their thought process.
Although external LOC participants were faster
than other participant groups at answering questions
in V4, they were equally fast in V1. This finding
does not fit our original hypothesis that internal and
external participants prefer different types of visual
layouts. It may be that the high familiarity of tree
menus like V1 created a training effect that caused
a break in the overall pattern. However, given the
data, we cannot conclude that external participants
perform better with containment views than with
list-like views. Rather than a clear trend of group
preference, a better interpretation of our results may
be that external LOC participants are generally better
able to answer inferential questions using unusual
visualization layouts. An experiment controlling the
potential confound of a highly familiar view is needed
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 11
to test which interpretation is better supported.
Familiarity may also explain the higher preference
scores across all participants for V1 and V2, though
it is interesting that there was no correspondence be-
tween preference and performance. It is also possible
that this lacking relationship may reflect the fact that
participants were paid a bonus for correct responses,
and therefore had an incentive to perform well despite
disliking the interface. In any case, people may have
felt that V3 and V4 were especially confusing due
to their unusual appearance, but they were just as
capable of answering questions with these interfaces.
5.2 Findings on Other Personality Factors
Compared to Green and Fisher [3], we found fewer
notable differences between participants categorized
by neuroticism or extraversion. In fact, these person-
ality dimensions had no significant effect on response
time, which is where the most dramatic effects of lo-
cus of control were found. On the other hand, we did
find that these dimensions influenced participants’
accuracy on search tasks.
In the case of neuroticism, our results provide sup-
port for Green and Fisher’s finding that more neurotic
participants generally perform better on search tasks
with visual interfaces. The highly neurotic partici-
pants were significantly more accurate overall, ag-
gregating all four views and both question types. As
suggested by Green and Fisher, this may be explained
by the theory that people with more neurotic or trait-
anxious personalities tend to be more attentive to
problem-solving tasks up to a certain level of com-
plexity [34].
However, we also found that this effect was es-
pecially pronounced in the case of V3 and V4, the
most container-like of the four views. Notably, the
low-neuroticism participants performed more poorly
on these two views than on V1 and V2, which likely
contributes to the overall relationship between neu-
roticism and accuracy (Figure 5). This mirrors the
findings on locus of control (see Figures 4 and 5) and
suggests that less neurotic participants, like the more
internal ones, are less able to make sense of these
types of visual layouts. It is possible that the greater
attentiveness of these users makes it easier for them
to learn an unfamiliar interface. Lower neuroticism
also correlates with a more internal locus of control,
and it is possible that the two scales measure similar
qualities that both indicate different aspects of a user’s
unwillingness or inability to adapt to unusual external
representations. An alternate explanation is that the
neurotic participants may put more pressure on them-
selves to complete a question correctly rather than
abandoning a task due to an unfamiliar visualization.
In the case of extraversion, our results seemingly di-
verge from Green and Fisher’s. They found that more
extraverted participants responded more quickly to
search tasks, and we found that more introverted
participants were more accurate on all task types.
One possibility is that, under some circumstances,
extraverted users respond more quickly but less ac-
curately. That said, we did not find any significant
results regarding response time in the current work,
so this remains speculative. However, this hypothesis
is supported by previous work on introversion and
problem solving which finds that more introverted
people tend to take more time to think through prob-
lems [15]. This extra time may have been particularly
helpful in a situation where they had to reason with
unfamiliar visual interfaces and datasets.
Since extraversion showed no significant relation-
ship with view type, the overall profile of a par-
ticipant in our study who performed well with the
more containment-like visual layouts is someone who
had an external or average locus of control and was
highly neurotic. As neuroticism measures emotional
stability, and locus of control the degree to which
a participant feels in command of situations, these
findings may indicate that feeling somewhat out of
control can be an advantage when it comes to making
sense of novel visualization designs. It is worth noting
that both of these dimensions tend to be negatively
correlated with job performance and other practical
outcomes [22]. Taken together, this suggests the pos-
sibility that persons who struggle with more standard
tasks are better suited to thinking with complex vi-
sual representations. This possibility warrants further
investigation. At the same time, a novel visualization
design, while helpful for some users, may be a hin-
drance to users who already perform a task well using
their own methods.
Further work is needed to understand these pat-
terns of users who perform better or more poorly
as visual layouts tend towards a strong containment
metaphor. It is necessary to examine whether these
findings can be generalized beyond this specific task
and data type as well as whether they can be gener-
alized to different sets of visual metaphors. Nonethe-
less, we argue that our findings, particularly those
on locus of control, serve as a step towards a better
understanding of the externalization theory of visual-
ization and how it works for different types of users.
5.3 Locus of Control and External Representa-
tions
By isolating the variable of layout style in this study,
we have shown that simplified layout changes can
produce locus of control effects similar to those found
in a user study that compares real-world systems.
This provides evidence that layout is a key factor
in mediating this effect, independent of the effects
of interaction style, visual encoding, and general
differences between traditional interfaces and visual
analytic systems. Although the current work does
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 12
not directly support a causal explanation, we can
speculate on why the different layouts we designed
interacted with participant locus of control the way
they did. We argue that the explanation for the behav-
ior we observed is that participants with an external
locus of control are willing to adapt more readily to
visualization styles that employ a strong structural
metaphor.
The four views in our study range from one (V1)
which is dominated by white space and uses subtle
visual organization to one (V4) which is dominated
by screen elements expressing a visual metaphor of
nested boxes. We argue that these views represent a
progression from visually implicit hierarchical struc-
ture to structure made visually explicit through layout
and the use of lines and fills. V1 (Figure 1(a)) uses only
a single dimension of spatial organization (horizon-
tal indentation) and makes little distinction between
leaf nodes and parent nodes. These factors make the
hierarchical structure of the data less explicit. For
example, two sibling nodes (such as Rhinocerotidae
and Equidae in Figure 1(a)) can be visually separated
to the point that their relationship is not immediately
obvious. Because of this, we argue that V1 is the least
structurally dominant of the four views.
After V1, each visualization in the sequence adds
at least one visual element used to draw attention
to the hierarchical structure of the data. The borders
in V2 (Figure 1(b)) slightly emphasize the nesting
of child nodes within parent nodes; for example,
Rhinoceros and its two children are clearly grouped.
V3 (Figure 1(c)) takes this further by highlighting the
names of parent nodes and arranging child nodes
horizontally to emphasize a spatial metaphor of con-
tainment. Finally, V4 (Figure 1(d)) gives the parent
node a strong visual emphasis with centering and
a title bar and collects the child nodes together at
the top of the parent to make sibling relationships
obvious. This is the least “list-like” of the four views
and uses the most “ink” and screen space to express
hierarchical relationships.
The connection between this use of explicit visual
structure and locus of control may be explained by
the body of thought that views visualization as an ex-
ternal mental representation. The field of distributed
cognition [35] sees mental processes such as problem
solving and memory as relying not only on knowl-
edge stored in the mind, but also on knowledge stored
in a person’s environment, in the form of physical
objects, information artifacts, and other people. Ap-
plying this perspective to visualization, Liu et al. [36]
have argued that a primary benefit of visualization
is the externalization of information. Externalization
makes problem-solving more efficient and accurate by
substituting quicker perceptual processes for cogni-
tive processing of information. Furthermore, studies
have shown that the form of these representations can
influence problem-solving strategies.
Users with an external locus of control are those
who expect the outside world to dominate their fate.
Taking a distributed cognition approach, it is possible
that these users also rely more heavily on outside
representations, rather than internal mental represen-
tations, when solving problems or making sense of
information. Conversely, those with an internal locus
of control may prefer to perform cognitive tasks more
internally, relying less on external representations. In
general, this makes people with an internal locus of
control more adept at problem-solving and learning,
as the extensive literature on locus of control has
shown. The results of this study may be surprising
in light of these findings. One possible explanation
is that the same tendency of internals to rely on
internal representations may make it more difficult
to use complex external representations found in a
visual analytics system. It is also possible that this
performance difference is only seen as individuals
with an internal locus of control first interact with
an unfamiliar system. We hypothesize that their per-
formance may dramatically improve as they tran-
sition from novices to experts of the system. This
explanation lends support to previous findings of
performance achievements by internals; however this
is mere speculation and requires further study.
If this is indeed the case, a visualization with a
highly explicit and unfamiliar visual structure may
be more jarring for an internal LOC user. Someone
with an external locus of control may be more will-
ing by nature to adapt her thinking to the external
representation, while the user with an internal locus
may be going through a more difficult process of
fitting the external representation to her own ideas of
what the data is like. Cassidy and Eachus’s work [25],
discussed in Section 2.3, implies that the “surface
learning” approach taken by external LOC students is
academically harmful, and based on well-established
findings in locus of control research, this does seem
to be the case in general. However, this very tendency
to focus on surface structure may be beneficial in
the context of learning a new visualization system.
Our external LOC participants were just as fast with
a novel visualization as they were with the kind of
indented list they see on their computer desktop every
day. There may be other ways of interpreting these
effects, and for now, this is a hypothesis for future
research, not a firm conclusion. Nevertheless, this
potential ability to make an advantage out of a per-
sonality style that is usually considered problematic
suggests intriguing future directions in the application
of visualization to learning.
Taken together with previous work, these findings
contribute to the case for an externalization-based
view of how people perform complex tasks with a
visualization. Furthermore, they imply that this exter-
nalization process varies greatly between people and
situations, which may be a significant factor in the
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 13
difficulty of controlling and interpreting evaluations
of visualization systems. This increased understand-
ing of how externalization relates to individual dif-
ferences not only contributes to visualization theory,
but also has practical implications for the design of
visualization systems.
6 IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN
These studies and others like them provide mounting
evidence that personality and design style can have
a significant effect on whether a user accepts a visu-
alization design. It is possible that a user’s personal-
ity can serve as shorthand for subtle cognitive style
differences that are not easily measurable otherwise,
but which gain importance in the exploratory context
of visualization use. The significant effect of locus
of control on performance suggests that it measures
something particularly important to visualization use,
and so in this section we focus on how understanding
locus of control can be used to improve visualization
design.
When we give users a novel visualization, we are
essentially asking them to give up some control over
their thinking processes. Some users will find this
helpful, while others may find it a hindrance. We
argue that a visualization designer should have a
sense of how willing a given user will be to take on
an external representation, and know how to design
a visualization that makes it more or less difficult to
ignore the structural aspects of that representation.
Based on our findings, a useful guideline for adap-
tation would be to increase the amount of explicit
structure for users that might have a more external
locus of control. Users with a very internal locus of
control will likely perform best with a visualization
style that uses simple spatial organization and min-
imal borders, outlines, and other grouping elements.
In practice, this type of design may correspond to the
maximized “data-ink ratio” argued for by Tufte [37].
External LOC users, on the other hand, may perform
more efficiently with a visualization style that vio-
lates this classic guideline by including more non-
functional elements such as borders, fills, and outlines
to call attention to a specific information structure.
In addition, this type of user may have an easier
time working with visualizations that use a two-
dimensional spatial layout to organize information.
Although it would be impractical to directly mea-
sure a user’s locus of control and adapt the visu-
alization accordingly, future work can address the
possibility of using this principle to guide design. Our
research views locus of control as predicting the de-
gree to which a user will, by innate disposition, prefer
her own internal mental models (internal LOC) versus
being willing to adapt to an external representation
(external LOC). This general principle, then, may ap-
ply in other situations where users are likely to prefer
a pre-existing mental model or problem-solving pro-
cess for reasons other than personality. Expert users,
for example, may be more resistant to visualizations
with highly explicit structure. Likewise, a user group
with a highly standardized analysis process should
be given visualizations with low structural emphasis.
A user group which is likely to approach a problem
in a more exploratory mode may find it easier to
work with visualizations that makes the structural
organization of data explicit.
While an analysis of our results suggests possibili-
ties for design, more research is needed to formalize
the growing body of insights into individual users
and visualization. Future work in this domain should
include the development of formal design guidelines
driven by a more comprehensive analysis of individ-
ual differences and their relationships to visual design
elements.
7 CONCLUSION
In subsequent work, we hope to combine these find-
ings with other work in individual differences to
pursue more complete models of the visualization
user. As Yi [38] has argued, major advances in un-
derstanding these individual differences must come
from collecting knowledge across studies. This work
is one attempt at doing so, and much more can be
done to find commonalities among the measures and
findings on how users adapt to visualizations.
In this paper, we have contributed findings on how
users with different personality types react to varying
layout styles used in a hierarchy visualization. We
found evidence that systematic differences in layout
style can indeed influence a user’s response time and
accuracy with different types of visualizations that are
informationally equivalent but differ in layout. These
findings seem to fit a pattern in which users with
a more external locus of control are more efficient
at using a visualization which uses a highly explicit
visual metaphor than users with a more internal locus
of control. We expect that these findings can serve as
a step towards better understanding of why subtle
differences between users’ personality styles can have
a surprising influence on visualization use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Tera M. Green and Brian
Fisher for their helpful discussions and collaboration.
This material is based in part upon work supported
by the International Program of the Department of
Homeland Security under grant number 2009-ST-108-
000007. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Department of Homeland Security. This
material is based in part upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
HOW VISUALIZATION LAYOUT RELATES TO LOCUS OF CONTROL AND OTHER PERSONALITY FACTORS 14
CIF-B-195. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] S. E. Palmer, Vision science: Photons to phenomenology. MIT
Press., 1999, vol. 1.
[2] C. G. Healey, “Perception in visualiza-
tion,” North Carolina State University,
http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/PP, Retrieved
March 2011.
[3] T. M. Green and B. Fisher, “Towards the personal equation
of interaction: The impact of personality factors on visual
analytics interface interaction,” in IEEE Visual Analytics Science
and Technology (VAST), 2010.
[4] T. M. Green, D. H. Jeong, and B. Fisher, “Using personality
factors to predict interface learning performance,” in Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences 43, January 2010.
[5] A. Dillon and C. Watson, “User analysis in HCI: The histori-
cal lesson from individual differences research,” International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 45, pp. 619–637, 1996.
[6] C. Conati and H. Maclaren, “Exploring the role of
individual differences in information visualization,” in
Advanced Visual Interfaces. ACM Press, 2008. [Online].
Available: http://www.cs.ubc.ca/ conati/my-papers/AVI-
2008-cameraWithInteraction.pdf
[7] B. Allen, “Individual differences and the conundrums of user-
centered design: Two experiments,” Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 508–520, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-
bin/fulltext/71001471/PDFSTART
[8] C. Chen, “Individual differences in a spatial-semantic
virtual environment,” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 529–542, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-
bin/fulltext/71001476/PDFSTART
[9] C. Ziemkiewicz and R. Kosara, “Preconceptions and individ-
ual differences in understanding visual metaphors,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 911–918, 2009, proceedings
EuroVis.
[10] L. R. Goldberg, “An alternative “description of personality”:
The big-five factor structure,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1216–1229, 1990.
[11] B. Tversky, “Functional significance of visuospatial represen-
tations,” in Handbook of higher-level visuospatial thinking, P. Shah
and A. Miyake, Eds. Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp.
1–34.
[12] B. Tversky, M. Agrawala, J. Heiser, P. U. Lee, P. Hanrahan,
D. Phan, C. Stolte, and M.-P. Daniele, “Cognitive design
principles: From cognitive models to computer models,” in
Model-based reasoning in science and engineering, L. Magnani,
Ed. King’s College, 2007, pp. 1–20.
[13] J. Heiser and B. Tversky, “Mental models of complex
systems: Structure and function,” http://www-
psych.stanford.edu/simwbt/diagrams/papers/mental models-
heiser-tversky.pdf.
[14] B. Tversky, J. Zacks, P. U. Lee, and J. Heiser, “Lines,
blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic communication with
schematic figures,” in Theory and application of diagrams, M. An-
derson, P. Cheng, and V. Haarslev, Eds. Springer, 2000, pp.
221–230.
[15] M. McCaulley, “The myers-briggs type indicator: A jungian
model for problem solving,” New Directions for Teaching and
Learning, vol. 1987, no. 30, pp. 37–53, 1987.
[16] L. Uziel, “The extraverted and the neurotic glasses are of
different colors,” Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 41,
no. 4, pp. 745–754, 2006.
[17] J. Chartrand, M. Rose, T. Elliott, C. Marmarosh, and S. Cald-
well, “Peeling back the onion: Personality, problem solving,
and career decision-making style correlates of career indeci-
sion,” Journal of Career Assessment, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 66–82, 1993.
[18] F. H. Farley, “Individual differences in solution time in error-
free problem solving,” British Journal of Social and Clinical
Psychology, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 306–309, 1966.
[19] T. Judge, A. Erez, J. Bono, and C. Thoresen, “Are measures
of self-esteem, neuroticism, locus of control, and generalized
self-efficacy indicators of a common core construct?” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 83, no. 3, p. 693, 2002.
[20] J. Walsh, J. Wilding, M. Eysenck, and J. Valentine, “Neuroti-
cism, locus of control, type a behaviour pattern and occupa-
tional stress,” Work & Stress, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 148–159, 1997.
[21] J. B. Rotter, “Generalized expectancies for internal versus
external control of reinforcement,” Psychological Monographs,
vol. 80, no. 609, 1966.
[22] T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Relationship of core self-
evaluations traits—self-esteem, generalized self-efficacy, locus
of control, and emotional stability—with job satisfaction and
job performance: A meta-analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 80–92, 2001.
[23] M. J. Findley and H. M. Cooper, “Locus of control and aca-
demic achievement: A literature review,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 419–427, 1983.
[24] C. R. Anderson, “Locus of control, coping behaviors, and
performance in a stress setting: A longitudinal study,” Journal
of Applied Psychology, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 446–451, 1977.
[25] S. Cassidy and P. Eachus, “Learning style, academic belief
systems, self-report student proficiency and academic achieve-
ment in higher education,” Educational Psychology, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 307–320, 2000.
[26] L. R. Goldberg, J. A. Johnson, H. W. Eber, R. Hogan, M. C.
Ashton, C. R. Cloninger, and H. C. Gough, “The international
personality item pool and the future of public-domain person-
ality measures,” Journal of Research in Personality, vol. 40, pp.
84–96, 2006.
[27] J. Heer and M. Bostock, “Crowdsourcing graphical perception:
Using Mechanical Turk to assess visualization design,” in
Proceedings CHI, 2010, pp. 203–212.
[28] R. Kosara and C. Ziemkiewicz, “Do Mechanical Turks dream
of square pie charts?” in BELIV Workshop, 2010, pp. 373–382.
[29] A. Kittur, E. H. Chi, and B. Suh, “Crowdsourcing user studies
with Mechanical Turk,” in Proceedings CHI, 2008, pp. 453–456.
[30] S. Hamlyn-Wright, R. Draghi-Lorenz, and J. Ellis, “Locus of
control fails to mediate between stress and anxiety and depres-
sion in parents of children with a developmental disorder,”
Autism, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 489–501, 2007.
[31] L. M. Lapierre and T. D. Allen, “Control at work, control at
home, and planning behavior: Implications for workfamily
conflict,” 2010, published online before print in Journal of
Management.
[32] C. Ziemkiewicz and R. Kosara, “The shaping of information
by visual metaphors,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1269–1276, 2008.
[33] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “NCBI
genome database,” http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/,
accessed 11/18/2010.
[34] M. C. Ioannou, K. Mogg, and B. P. Bradley, “Vigilance for
threat: effects of anxiety and defensiveness,” Personality and
Individual Differences, vol. 36, pp. 1879–1891, 2004.
[35] J. Hollan, E. Hutchins, and D. Kirsh, “Distributed cognition:
Toward a new foundation for human-computer interaction
research,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 174–196, 2000.
[36] Z. Liu, N. Nersessian, and J. Stasko, “Distributed cognition as
a theoretical framework for information visualization,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 14,
no. 6, pp. 1173–1180, 2008.
[37] E. R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Graphics Press, 1983.
[38] J. S. Yi, “Implications of individual differences on evaluating
information visualization techniques,” in Proceedings of the
BELIV Workshop, 2010.

