Evaluation of the Exertion and Motivation Factors of
a Virtual Reality Exercise Game for Children with Autism
Samantha Finkelstein? Tiffany Barnes† Zachary Wartell‡ Evan A. Suma§
?Carnegie Mellon University †North Carolina State University ‡UNC Charlotte §USC Institute for Creative Technologies
ABSTRACT
Children with autism experience significant positive behavioral and
health benefits from exercise, though many of these children tend
to lead sedentary lifestyles. Video games that incorporate physical
activity, known as exergames, may help to motivate such children to
engage in vigorous exercise, thus leading to more healthy lifestyles
and reducing the likelihood of obesity. In this paper, we present
a study of physical activity and motivation level for ten children
with autism as they played an immersive virtual reality exergame
that involved fast-paced full-body movement. Our results showed
that most children, including non-verbal participants, were able to
achieve vigorous activity levels, with several of them maintaining
very high levels of exertion. Furthermore, the children reported
high levels of enjoyment and indicated they would exercise more
often if such games were routinely available. These encouraging
findings suggest that exergames are a promising way to empower
the families of children with autism with tools to help improve
their child’s health and quality of life.
Keywords: Virtual reality, serious games, exergames, autism
Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Multimedia Information Systems—Artificial, augmented, and vir-
tual realities; J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences]—Health; K.8 [Per-
sonal Computing]: General—Games
1 INTRODUCTION
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a pervasive developmental dis-
order that affects interpersonal communication, social interaction,
and imaginative play [23]. ASD is a spectrum disorder, which
means that children range from very low-functioning to extraordi-
narily high-functioning, and may have drastically different experi-
ences. Many children with autism also commonly engage in self-
stimulatory behavior, such as hand-flapping, clapping, rocking, or
repetitive vocalizations [18]. These sometimes chaotic behaviors
interfere with the child’s ability to learn, engage in positive social
behaviors [26, 4, 15] and make it difficult for the child to be inte-
grated into a mainstream educational environment [27]. Children
who engage in these behaviors may be hard to reach and oblivi-
ous to external stimuli [18], making it difficult for them to learn
and remain on task. The elimination or control of these behaviors
may result in improvements in the child’s quality of life by allowing
them to improve their learning, attention, and appropriate responses
to their environment [17].
Modern methods to address behavioral difficulties for children
with autism include overcorrection of behavior [10] and altering
?e-mail: slfink@cs.cmu.edu
†e-mail: tmbarnes@ncsu.edu
‡e-mail: zwartell@uncc.edu
§e-mail: suma@ict.usc.edu
Figure 1: A child with autism playing Astrojumper using a three-wall
rear-projected immersive display.
the child’s physical environment [8]. While these methods have
been shown to be useful in reducing troublesome behavior, they re-
quire a great deal of active parental involvement, and may result
in a significant amount of stress for the child. Fortunately, more
recently, studies have shown that engaging in physical activity is
a highly promising method of reducing self-stimulatory behaviors
[22, 28, 21]. Aerobic exercise, such as jogging, is particularly ef-
fective, and can decrease self-stimulation and improve appropri-
ate play and contingent responses[15]. However, it is important to
note that mild exercise provides little to no improvements in self-
stimulation, while vigorous activity is substantially effective at re-
ducing these behaviors [14, 6, 17].
Unfortunately, many children with autism have a high risk of in-
activity due to both these self-stimulatory actions as well as other
behavioral and social deficits. Problems understanding social cues,
making eye contact, engaging reciprocal conversation, and diffi-
culty making friends means that children are likely to have fewer
opportunities to engage in team physical activities [20]. Reduced
motor control and abnormal movement patterns may also reduce
opportunities for these children to participate in many athletic ac-
tivities. The sedentary lifestyle of these children increases the like-
lihood of obesity compared with the general population, with 19%
of children with autism overweight (BMI ? 95th percentile) and
another 35% at risk for becoming overweight (BMI ? 85th per-
centile) [7]. Obesity leads to a number of serious medical issues,
making it particularly important to motivate children with autism to
engage in vigorous physical activity.
While exercise is certainly valuable for all children, given the
unique social challenges of autism and the increased likelihood of
obesity among this population, it is vitally important to motivate
those that may be prone towards leading sedentary lifestyles. The
marriage of physical exercise with video games, also known as ex-
ergaming, is a promising approach that has been increasing in at-
tention and popularity in recent years [24]. Additionally, the re-
cent release of motion sensing devices for home video game sys-
tems, most notably the Microsoft Kinect, Sony Playstation Move,
and Nintendo Wii remote and balance board, has resulted in a large
number of games that use body motion as a game mechanic. There
is a great deal of anecdotal evidence from parents of children with
autism saying that exergames are effective motivators for engaging
in physical activity; however, to our knowledge, such behavior has
not been formally evaluated for this specific population.
In this paper, we report a study of physical activity and motiva-
tion level for ten children with autism as they played Astrojumper,
an immersive virtual reality exercise game requiring rapid body
movements to dodge obstacles, collect bonuses, and fight battles
(see Figure 1). This particular game has been previously studied
with neurotypical children and adults, where it was shown to be an
effective exercise motivator [9]. Building on this previous work, we
sought to explore the application of immersive exergames for chil-
dren with autism in terms of both motivational and physiological
effectiveness. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first full-body
exercise game that has been formally evaluated with children with
autism. Our results demonstrate that exergames are a promising
method for engaging children with autism, and we argue that lever-
aging video game technology as an intervention has the potential to
address many behavioral and health problems commonly associated
with this population.
2 PREVIOUS WORK
The introduction of motion sensing hardware to popular video game
platforms has resulted in numerous commercial titles that use phys-
ical activity as a game mechanic (e.g. Wii Sports, Kinect Sports).
However, most commercially developed motion-based video games
are designed primarily for entertainment purposes, and thus it is of-
ten possible for users to “game the system.” For example, while
the Nintendo Wii allows players to engage in realistic motions such
as swinging a tennis racket, it does not require accurate and real-
istic behavior, as frustrated players observe when they are beaten
by an opponent who was sitting on the couch flicking their wrist.
There is evidence that exergames can get neurotypical users to en-
gage in more physical activity than they would with a typical video
game; however, these users only barely reach moderate exercise
levels during gameplay and generally don’t approach the vigorous
activity levels needed for exercise to be effective [11, 12]. Sev-
eral commercial titles have been introduced specifically to promote
weight loss and fitness (e.g. Wii Fit, The Biggest Loser Ultimate
Workout), but these are typically designed for adults, and it is un-
clear whether they would be able to successfully engage children,
especially those with developmental disorders.
Exergames require carefully designed game mechanics that bal-
ance the psychological flow of gameplay (entertainment) with the
physiological flow of exercise (exertion) [24]. Successfully balanc-
ing these two considerations is challenging, a fact that is supported
by previous evaluations of commercial exergame interfaces from
the literature. For example, Luke et al. analyzed energy expenditure
in a variety of exergames using the Sony EyeToy, and found that
users largely engaged in only small bursts of exercise followed by
long pauses, preventing their heart rate from building [19]. Smith
noted similar problems during a personal analysis of three video
game extertion interfaces, finding large variability in exertion be-
tween games and difficulty maintaining an elevated heart rate due
pauses caused by load times [25]. While playing commercial ex-
ergames is surely better than engaging in no physical activity at all,
these findings suggest that such games that are designed primarily
for entertainment value may not be effective at inducing the exer-
tion levels required for a vigorous workout.
Several exergames have been developed by the research commu-
nity to specifically engage children in physical activity. One such
application is Bug-Smasher, which uses a tiled grid interface with
randomly-appearing colored lights that engage the child to jump
around and “smash bugs” [29]. Interestingly, the authors found that
children who projected their fantasies into the game world reported
higher levels of enjoyment. In an attempt to leverage such imagi-
native fantasies in real world play, Bekker et al. presented two case
studies with interactive physical props that stimulated open-ended
gameplay requiring body motion [5]. One example of an interac-
tive video game to engage children in physical activity is QuiQui,
which was developed to gather data on the intuitive body motions
that children employed when attempting to control a game charac-
ter [13]. Performing user tests with a Wizard of Oz approach as well
as a functional vision-based prototype, they found that patterns in
children’s intuitive motions could be used to improve vision algo-
rithms and avatar animations for exergames. Additionally, noting
that game development tends to focus on the upper body due to
technical constraints, they suggest that future game designs should
aim to provide more holistic full-body motions such as running and
jumping. However, none of these games included evaluations of the
physical exertion levels that children attained during gameplay.
3 STUDY DESIGN
While Astrojumper has been shown to be effective in engaging neu-
rotypical children and adults in vigorous, full-body exercise [9], it
is unclear whether it would also be effective in motivating children
with autism. Since we could not find any published work that pre-
sented exergame design considerations for children with develop-
mental disorders, we sought to evaluate how well the game moti-
vates such children to engage in physical activity at the exertion
level and duration recommended by exercise experts.
3.1 Participants
We recruited ten participants primarily through interactions with
local chapters of autism groups such as Autism Speaks and The
Autism Society of North Carolina. The participants were invited to
come to our lab with their parent for two separate sessions about
a week apart. Participants ranged from ages 8 - 20, (M=12.60,
SD=4.09), with the majority of participants between 8 and 13. Two
of our participants were older (ages 18 and 20) and were also non-
verbal, meaning that they were able to understand and follow direc-
tions, but were not able to communicate through verbal language.
These two participants also were not able to type, so they did not fill
out the post-experiment questionnaire. Their parents filled out the
objective information that they knew on the pre-experiment ques-
tionnaire. Participants ranged from moderately low-functioning to
very high-functioning, with two diagnosed with Asperger’s Syn-
drome. This is a type of autism where affected individuals are
usually quite high-functioning with either average or above-average
intelligence and none of language delays as a young child that are
characteristic of most children with autism.
3.2 System Overview
When playing Astrojumper, the user flies through an outer space
environment with a first-person perspective, avoiding planets by
dodging, ducking, and jumping. Points are accumulated automat-
ically over time so long as the user avoids colliding with an ob-
stacle. A base rate of one point per second is added, though this
rate can be increased by collecting golden suns to add bonus score
multipliers. In the event of a collision with any part of the player’s
body, the score is temporarily frozen, and any previously collected
bonus score multipliers are reset. The game also features periodic
UFO battles, where an alien ship appears and begins shooting red
laser beams at the player. To defeat the UFO, the user must dodge
these beams while shooting green lasers through strong throwing or
punching motions.
Following the American College of Sports Medicine’s guide-
lines for exercise [2], Astrojumper’s gameplay is divided into three
phases: (1) a warm-up phase with gradual increases in speed, (2) an
exertion phase requiring continuous vigorous physical activity, and
(3) a cool-down phase that allows a gradual decrese in effort. To
balance entertainment with physical exertion, the difficulty of the
game is dynamically adjusted based on the player’s performance.
This adaptation ensures that gameplay will not become trivially
easy or impossibly difficult for different players with varying levels
of physical fitness. More details on Astrojumper’s design philoso-
phy and characteristics can be found in the previous work [9].
We deployed Astrojumper on an immersive surround-screen dis-
play system comprising three 2.44m x 1.83m rear-projected stereo-
scopic screens, each of which used two Barco Gemini projectors to
display the images for each eye. Circularly polarized glasses were
worn on the user’s head, with a Polhemus Fastrak electromagnetic
sensor attached to the rim of the glasses. Two more trackers were
enclosed in sweatbands on the user’s wrist, and a fourth tracker
was attached to the bottom of a small backpack to track the waist.
All cables were routed through the backpack to allow the user to
move freely without getting tangled. Physiological data was col-
lected during gameplay using a BodyMedia SenseWear armband.
The game software was run on a quad core Intel Core i7 3.33GHz
PC with 12GB of RAM, and a total of three NVIDIA GTX 260
graphics cards provided output for all six projectors.
3.3 Procedure
Participants were invited to come to the laboratory for two separate
sessions spaced about a week apart, each of which took approxi-
mately 45 minutes to complete. In one session, participants played
the game in a three-screen surround configuration. In the other ses-
sion, only the front screen of the immersive display was used, and
the two side screens remained off. The order of presentation for the
sessions was counterbalanced across the study.
On the first visit, participants and their parents were given in-
formed consent sheets, and the experimenter spoke directly to the
child about what they would be doing in the study and the fam-
ilies were given the opportunity to ask questions. In addition to
obtaining consent from the parents, assent was also obtained from
the child, with communication assistance from the parents when
needed. Following that, the child and their parent completed a de-
mographic survey, and the child’s height and weight were collected
for computation of physiological measures. The child was then fit-
ted with the tracking equipment and exercise armband, and the rules
of the game were explained. We initially displayed a static virtual
world on the projection screens until the child was comfortable,
followed by a two minute practice game that remained relatively
slow and easy. After the practice ended, we encouraged the child
to ask questions and offered gameplay advice if we noticed that the
child seemed to be not fully understanding. The child then played a
15 minute game session including the warm-up, exertion, and cool
down phases. After completing the game, participants completed a
post-experiment questionnaire, and the session concluded. On the
second visit to the lab, the experimenter pointed out that the system
was a little different from the last time, having either two more or
two less screens than the previous session. The child then followed
the same procedure as the first session, followed by a short final
survey to compare both versions of the game display (three screen
vs. single screen).
3.4 Measures
Demographic survey The demographic survey collected in-
formation on the child’s age, ethnicity, video game habits, and type
of Autism Spectrum Disorder the child was diagnosed with. It also
collected information on the child’s movement patterns using the
Body Use index from the Behavior-Disturbed Children (Autism)
Questionnaire, identifying whether or not the child engages in “age
appropriate body use”, “mildly abnormal body use”, “moderately
abnormal body use”, “severely abnormal body use,” or somewhere
between any two of these categories [1]. The parents of our two
non-verbal participants filled out as much of the survey as the could
for their children, however, subjective responses that these parents
could not accurately report were not included in our analysis.
Physiological Measures The BodyMedia SenseWear arm-
band recorded the participants’ metabaloic equivalent (MET) dur-
ing gameplay, which is defined as the amount of oxygen consumed
while sitting at rest. The MET concept represents a simple, practi-
cal, and easily understood procedure for expressing the energy cost
of physical activities as a multiple of the resting metabolic rate. For
our analyses, we used the standard breakdown for classifying ac-
tivity levels: activity under 4 METs was considered light-intensity,
activity between 4 and 6 METs was considered moderate-intensity,
and anything 6 METs or above was considered high-intensity or
vigorous activity [16]. While we were initially concerned that chil-
dren with autism would have issues wearing the armband, none of
our participants complained or indicated discomfort as a result of
the device. The armband reported the following measures: (1) the
participant’s average MET level throughout the gameplay session,
(2) the number of calories burned, (3) and the number of minutes
spent in vigorous exercise. Because research indicates that vigor-
ous exercise is most successful at reducing self-stimulatory behav-
ior in children with autism, we were very interested in observing
the amount of time that participants spent exercising at or above 6
METs while playing Astrojumper.
Post-experiment questionnaire Participants filled out a
questionnaire at the end of both of their gameplay sessions, which
included ratings on a 7-point scale regarding enjoyment, replaya-
bilty, and amount of exercise. We also collected ratings on what as-
pects of Astrojumper were most fun for the participants (1=“much
less fun,” 4=“same amount of fun,” 7=“much more fun”). Specifi-
cally, they were asked to consider the following: (1) if Astrojumper
wasn’t in stereoscopic 3D, (2) if they didn’t need to run around to
play, (3) if they needed to hold controllers, and (4) if they were
playing on a smaller screen. After their second exposure, they were
also asked to rate whether they preferred the one-screen or three-
screen version of the game in terms of fun, motivation, and amount
of exercise (1=“strongly one-screen” to 7=“strongly three-screen”).
4 RESULTS
4.1 Demographic information
Most participants did not have very severe body movement impair-
ments, with all participants’ parents marking that their child was
between a “1” (completely age-appropriate body control, child has
the same ease, agility, and coordination of a neurotypical child) and
“3” (moderately abnormal body use, including strange finger move-
ments, peculiar body posturing, self-directed aggression, rocking,
spinning, finger-wiggling, or toe-walking), (M = 2.00, SD = 0.82).
Participants universally rated that they enjoyed video games a great
deal, with no one selecting lower than a 6 out of 7 (M = 6.83, SD
= 0.33). We had one outlier, our lowest-functioning participant,
whose parent reported that he played video games approximately
60 hours per week. The remaining participants reported that they
played video games between 3 and 15 hours per week, (M = 9.67,
SD = 4.44).
Participant responses (1-7) on questions pertaining to exercise
enjoyment did not indicate preferences towards physical activity ,
such as“I engage in physical activity whenever I can” and “I feel
uneasy when it comes to doing strenuous physical exercise” (re-
versed), (M = 4.43, SD = 1.53). We found similar results on ques-
tions about perceived exercise competence, including “I’m better at
sports than other kids my age” and “I don’t do too well at outside
games” (reversed), (M = 4.20, SD = 1.81). We found a positive
Vigorous Activity Results
Participant
10987654321
M
in
u
te
s 
Sp
en
t i
n
 
Vi
go
ro
u
s 
A
ct
iv
ity
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
9.00
11.50
3.50
2.50
4.00
1.50
11.00
12.0011.50
Page 1
Figure 2: The amount of time spent in vigorous activity (MET level of
6 or greater) for each participant. Since the warm-up and cool-down
phases each lasted 2.5 minutes, 11-12 minutes of vigorous exercise
is about the maximum possible time one could have reasonably spent
vigorously exercising during the 15 minute session.
correlation between participants’ ratings of exercise enjoyment and
perceived competence, r(10) = +.86, p < .01.
4.2 Physiological measures
Participants’ physiological measures were calculated by the
Sensewear armband that took the participant’s age, height, and
weight into consideration. We found no significant differences be-
tween the screen conditions or first/second exposure to the game,
so we averaged the physiological data across the two sessions.
Participants spent an average of 6.65 minutes (SD = 4.77) out of
the 15 minute game session engaging in vigorous exercise (i.e. at
MET levels of 6 or greater). However, as demonstrated in Figure 2,
there was a large amount of variance in the amount of time between
participants, with the children roughly falling into two groups. Half
of the participants spent the majority of the game session in the
vigorous zone, with four of them spending 11 minutes or more.
This is especially encouraging because the warm-up and cool-down
phases each lasted 2.5 minutes, meaning that 11-12 minutes of vig-
orous exercise is about the maximum possible time one would have
reasonably spent vigorously exercising out of the 15 minute ses-
sion. However, the other five participants spent less four or less
minutes in the vigorous zone, with one participant never peaking
above moderate activity.
Participants’ average MET levels over the entire gameplay ses-
sion were at moderate levels (M = 5.07, SD = 1.24). However, this is
not the most informative measurement, because that included time
spent in the warm-up and cool-down phases, when they would not
be expected to be exercising vigorously. It is more useful to observe
the total calories estimated to have been burned during a game ses-
sion (M = 90.39, SD = 35.62). We observed a large amount of
variation in caloric expenditure between individuals, but this is to
be expected since it is highly dependent on the participant’s physi-
cal fitness. However, as shown in Figure 3, all the participants that
spent less time in the vigorous zone managed to burn upwards of
60 calories during the 15 minute session.
4.3 Post-experiment questionnaire
Participants filled out this survey at the conclusion of both their
first and second exposure to Astrojumper. Again, we found no sig-
nificant differences between the screen conditions or first/second
Calorie Results
Participant
10987654321
Es
tim
at
ed
 
Ca
lo
rie
s 
B
u
rn
ed
200
150
100
50
0
128
556562
69
135
70 67
151
104
Page 1
Figure 3: The total estimated calories burned by participants.
exposure to the game, so we analyzed the average of each partic-
ipant’s ratings (1-7) across the two sessions. Our post-experiment
survey results were very positive, with participants reporting that
they greatly enjoyed playing Astrojumper (M = 6.63, SD = 1.06)
and that they would exercise more often if they could play Astro-
jumper whenever they wanted (M = 6.00, SD = 1.00). Participants
also reported moderately high scores when asked if they got a good
workout (M = 5.38, SD = 1.16), though this self-perception was not
correlated with the amount of time the player actually spent engag-
ing in vigorous activity. Astrojumper was rated as slightly more
exercise than they would usually get (M = 4.94, SD = 1.15).
We received very encouraging results regarding replayability,
as this aspect is very important in maintaining long-term exercise
goals with video games. Participants reported that they would be
very likely to play Astrojumper once a week or more if they could,
(M = 6.38, SD = 0.88). Additionally, we found extremely low re-
ports regarding both whether the participants thought Astrojumper
was boring (M = 1.38, SD = 1.06) and how likely it would be that
they got bored of Astrojumper eventually (M = 2.18, SD = 1.65).
Participants also indicated that they would be interested in coming
back to the lab to play Astrojumper a third time, even if it wouldn’t
be part of the study (M = 6.19, SD = 1.19.)
Participants also generally indicated that the immersive, full-
body aspects of the game contribution to their enjoyment (1=“much
less fun” to 7=“much more fun”). Participants indicated that play-
ing on a smaller screen would most strongly make the game less
fun (M = 1.25, SD = .378) and as would removing the stereoscopic
3D effect (M = 1.69, SD = 1.03). Participants also indicated that
the game would be less fun if they didn’t need to move around to
play (M = 2.00, SD = 1.20). When asked their preference regarding
the single-screen vs. the three-screen setup, all but one participant
indicated that they preferred playing with three screens. The one
player who selected the single screen condition stated that he found
the side screens distracting.
4.4 Qualitative feedback and observations
As some of our participants were more low-functioning, our quali-
tative observations may be more indicative than their responses on
questionnaires. Many of the subjects seemed to be projecting fan-
tasies during gameplay. This included expressions such as “Alert!
Alert! We have the aliens on the loose! They will get me, they will
get me!”, and “I have lasers, magical - magical lasers and they will
- and I’m gonna, and I’m gonna punch those aliens out of here, oh
yeah!” Two participants excitedly told their parents and the experi-
menters that they felt like comic book characters, and described (in
great detail) how they could use their powers from Astrojumper to
“destroy bad guys.” All but one of the participants laughed as they
threw their lasers, and most cheered when they beat the UFO.
While seven of our participants exhibited only slightly impaired
movement patterns, three engaged in constant self-stimulatory be-
havior, including hand-flapping and rocking, as well as other char-
acteristic behaviors such as toe-walking. These three participants
in particular had difficulty making the punching motion necessary
to shoot the laser. We intentionally designed it so that the laser was
only triggered by a controlled forward throw. As we hoped, by their
third exposure to the UFO on their first trial, these three participants
began being able to consistently do this motion. By the end of the
second session, these participants were able to make this motion al-
most, if not as well as, other participants. We were particularly in-
spired by our lowest-functioning non-verbal participants who were
able to play the game very well, one of which even earning the top
score out of all participants. One of the parents stated that she was
moved to see her child so clearly engaged and excited by something
new, and that she was very happy to see him exercising.
The most common comment from participants was that they
liked being able to control the game with their body. One child
explained “I am the controller, so I need to move myself to get the
game to work. If I’m lazy the game won’t work at all so I need to
move around.” Participants also often described the sense of pres-
ence they felt in the game. One child who was able to communicate,
though not in full sentences, said multiple times that Astrojumper
was beautiful and that he “could look at the stars [in the game]
all day.” A few of the higher-functioning participants provided de-
tailed descriptions of plot they would like in the game - in many
cases, plot that their parents confirmed had something to do with
their special interest. One child spent a great deal of time playing
an outer space video game, and had clearly been projecting memo-
ries and thoughts about this game into his Astrojumper experience.
One child’s special interest was Marvel comics, and he spoke ex-
tensively about all of the different superheroes he was pretending
to be while he played. Another child spent most of his free time
watching the Star Wars movies, and would hum / sing the tunes
and call out to characters from the movies throughout gameplay.
While these were the only three participants that we identified as
integrating their special interest into the game, most other partici-
pants frequently vocalized general cries of excitement (“Oh! Get
him!” or “I got it!”). A few of others used the post-experiment
questionnaire to describe how they would have liked to improve
their game - often involving their special interest. For example,
one participant who listed “cartoons” as his special interest recom-
mended that Scooby and Shaggy from the cartoon series Scooby
Doo should be included in future versions of Astrojumper. This is
consistent among children who listed special interests - the child
who loved Nascar recommended that the game include race cars,
and the child who was very interested in zombie mythology said
there should have been enemy zombies present in the game. The
participants who either did not list a special interest or listed more
general things like “reading” or “Wikipedia” did not recommend
any changes to the game that altered content, instead commenting
that “there should be more UFOs to shoot” and “I want to be able
to shoot the planets with lasers too.”
5 DISCUSSION
While playing Astrojumper, all but one of our participants achieved
vigorous physical activity for at least 1.5 minutes, half of our partic-
ipants spent the majority of gameplay in vigorous activity, and a few
even spent the maximum amount of time possible vigorously exer-
cising, given the inclusion of warm-up and cool-down phases. Ad-
ditionally, all participants, even the ones who spent smaller amounts
of time in the vigorous zone, were estimated to have burned a de-
cent number of calories during the 15 minute session. We found
these results very encouraging, and were particularly motivated by
the participants high ratings of their own enjoyment from the ex-
ergame and their belief that they would exercise more if they could
play games like Astrojumper whenever they wanted. It is impor-
tant to note that the two non-verbal participants were not able to
provide feedback, and some of the children received parental assis-
tance in filling out questionnaires, so we should be cautious about
over-generalizing the findings from the self-reported data. How-
ever, our qualitative observations indicated that even the low func-
tioning and non-verbal children seemed motivate to engage with
the game physically. Since research indicates that vigorous exer-
cise is the most effective way to reduce self-stimulatory behaviors
in children with autism, we believe that further development and
evaluation of exercise games is needed for this population.
At the time we ran this study, the Microsoft Kinect had not
yet been released, and participants made comments about how this
game wouldn’t be as fun on the Wii because they couldn’t control
the game using their body. Given that low-cost full-body tracking
devices such as the Kinect are now commonly available for home
video game consoles, we believe there is great potential for inte-
grating exergames into the daily routines of children with autism,
as well as neurotypical children. Additionally, while an immersive
surround-screen environment is not a setup that people typically
have in their homes, our results found that this level of immersion
doesn’t increase the level of vigorous activity of our participants.
Even so, large televisions, wall projectors, and even 3D stereo-
scopic screens are becoming increasingly common. Such home
equipment could allow for gameplay that approaches the immer-
sion level achieved in our lab in our single-screen condition. As
such, we have also created a version of Astrojumper that works
with a Kinect on the user’s home PC, and we are planning to make
it available for download in the near future. While we have not
evaluated the Kinect version of this game formally on children with
disabilities or neurotypical children, initial playtesting in our lab in-
dicates that this version is just as engaging and promotes as much
vigorous activity as the version we deployed on our VR system. In
future work, we will conduct user studies to examine differences in
motivation and vigorous exercise between our expensive VR system
and more widely available low-cost systems such as the Kinect.
Looking at the children’s interests in athletics, we found that the
participants who felt they were not as good at sports as their peers
tended to engage in more solitary activities such as swimming or
bowling. However, those that had more confidence in their athletic
competence participated in team sports. Additionally, we found
a correlation between how confident the participants were in their
athletic ability and how much they enjoyed exercise. While we do
not have enough information to infer causation and we are dealing
with a small sample size, we believe that making exercise fun might
be a reasonable first step towards improving a child’s confidence
in their physical ability. Based on the results from our study, we
suggest that video games are a promising way to achieve this goal.
Astrojumper was specifically designed with a space theme be-
cause it is a common special interest cited by families of children
with autism. One of our most notable observations was that the
participants who had listed special interests that somehow paral-
leled aspects of Astrojumper (Star Wars, super heroes, and a differ-
ent space-themed video game) made vocalizations during gameplay
that indicated the child was projecting parts of those interests into
Astrojumper. Additionally, the children who listed concrete special
interests entirely unrelated to Astrojumper, such as race cars, car-
toons, and zombies, said that the game would have been more fun
if it included those elements in the design. Children with autism
typically have a great deal of perseverence with their special in-
terest, and their particular interest can remain the driving force in
the child’s life. There is a great deal of anecdotal evidence from
teachers who recommend letting children with autism pick their
own topic for their writing and learning assignments, harnessing
the child’s interest to increase excitement about schoolwork. These
numerous accounts have been corroborated by studies showing that
children with autism improve their social behaviors when the play
environment includes their special interest [3]. Therefore, we sug-
gest that leveraging special interests may be a valuable design me-
chanic for exergames that need to maintain the child’s interest even
after repeated exposure. Given the variability in these interests, it
is not practical to custom-build games tailored perfectly for each
child’s particular interest. However, it may be possible to create a
general game design that contains multiple content themes and im-
age sets that the child can choose from, such as dinosaurs, trains,
sharks, astrology, etc. Another very promising possibility would
be creating an intuitive interface that would allow the child or the
child’s family to upload some of his or her favorite images to cus-
tomize the look and feel of the exergame.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a study of physical activity and motiva-
tion level for ten children with autism as they played an immersive
virtual reality exergame. Our results showed that most participants
were able to achieve vigorous exercise, and many of them main-
tained high levels of exertion for the majority of game time. Fur-
thermore, feedback from participants was highly promising, with
many children indicating that they would like to play the game
again. In the future, we plan to conduct longitudinal studies of the
long-term effectiveness of exergames in motivating children with
autism to make lifestyle changes that incorporate vigorous physical
exercise. Recent advancements in display and video game tracking
technology make it feasible to consider deploying such full-body
exergames in home scenarios, thus empowering families of chil-
dren with autism or other developmental disorders with the tools to
help them improve their child’s health and quality of life.
REFERENCES
[1] http://healthscienceresearch.com, Retrieved April 2011.
[2] American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM’s Guidelines for Exer-
cise Testing and Prescription. Lippincott Williams & Williams, Balti-
more, MD, 6th edition, 2000.
[3] M. J. Baker. Incorporating the thematic ritualistic behaviors of chil-
dren with autism into games. Journal of Positive Behavior Interven-
tions, 2(1):66–84, 2000.
[4] C. K. Bass. Running can modify classroom behavior. Journal of
Learning Disabilities, 18(1):160–161, 1985.
[5] M. Bekker, E. van den Hoven, P. Peters, and B. k. Hemmink. Stim-
ulating children’s physical play through interactive games: two ex-
ploratory case studies. In IDC ’07: Proceedings of the 6th interna-
tional conference on Interaction design and children, pages 163–164,
New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
[6] D. Celiberti, H. Bobo, K. Kelly, S. Harris, and J. Handleman. The
differential and temporal effects of antecedent exercise on the self-
stimulatory behavior of a child with autism. Research in Developmen-
tal Disabilities, 18(2):139–150, 1997.
[7] C. Curtin, L. Bandini, E. Perrin, D. Tybor, and A. Must. Prevalence
of overweight in children and adolescents with attention deficit hyper-
activity disorder and autism spectrum disorders: a chart review. BMC
Pediatrics, 5(1):48, 2005.
[8] P. Duker and E. Rasing. Effects of re-designing the physical environ-
ment on self-stimulation and on-task behavior in three autistic-type
developmentally disabled individuals. Journal of Autism and Devel-
opmental Disorders, 19(1):449–460, 1989.
[9] S. Finkelstein, A. Nickel, Z. Lipps, T. Barnes, Z. Wartell, and E. A.
Suma. Astrojumper : Motivating Exercise with an Immersive Vir-
tual Reality Exergame. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environ-
ments, 20(1):78–92, 2011.
[10] R. Foxx and N. Azrin. The elimination of autistic self-stimulation be-
havior by over-correction. Journal of Applied Behavior and Analysis,
6(1):1–14, 1978.
[11] L. E. F. Graves, N. D. Ridgers, and G. Stratton. The contribution of up-
per limb and total body movement to adolescents energy expenditure
whilst playing nintendo wii. European Journal of Applied Physiology,
104(4):617–623, 2008.
[12] L. E. F. Graves, G. Stratton, N. D. Ridgers, and N. Cable. Comparison
of energy expenditure in adolescents when playing new generation
and sedentary computer games: cross sectional study. British Medical
Journal, 335(7633), 2007.
[13] J. Ho¨ysniemi, P. Ha¨ma¨la¨inen, L. Turkki, and T. Rouvi. Children’s intu-
itive gestures in vision-based action games. Commun. ACM, 48(1):44–
50, 2005.
[14] L. Kern, R. Koegel, and G. Dunlap. The influence of vigorous versus
mild exercise on autistic stereotyped behaviors. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 14(1):57–67, 1984.
[15] L. Kern, R. L. Koegel, K. Dyer, P. A. Blew, and L. R. Fenton. The ef-
fects of physical exercise on self-stimulation and appropriate respond-
ing in autistic children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor-
ders, 12(1):399–419, 1982.
[16] M. Lee and R. Paffenbarger. Associations of light, moderate, and
vigorous intensity physical activity with longevity. American Journal
of Epidemiology, 151(3):293–299, 2000.
[17] L. J. Levinson and G. Reid. The effects of exercise intensity on the
stereotypic beheaviors of individuals with autism. Adapted Physical
Activity Quarterly, 10(3):255–268, 1993.
[18] L. Lovaas, C. Newsome, and C. Hickman. Brief report: The effects
of exercise on the self-stimulatory behaviors and positive responding
of adolescents with autism. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
20(1):45–68, 1987.
[19] R. C. Luke, M. G. Coles, T. A. Anderson, and J. N. Gilbert. Oxy-
gen cost and heart rate response during interactive whole body video
gaming. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 37(5), 2005.
[20] C.-Y. Pan and G. Frey. Physical activity patterns in youth with autism
spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
36(1):597–606, 2006.
[21] A. Prupas and G. Reid. Effects of exercise frequency on stertypic
behaviors of children with developmental disabilities. Education
and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities,
36(2):196–206, 2001.
[22] P. Reid, D. Factor, N. Freeman, and J. Sherman. The effects of phys-
ical exercise on three autistic and developmentally disordered adoles-
cents. Therapeutic Recreation Journal, 22(1):47–56, 1988.
[23] C. Sicile-Kira. Autism Spectrum Disorders: the complete guide to un-
derstandnig autism. The Berkley Publishing Group, New York, USA,
2004.
[24] J. Sinclair, P. Hingston, and M. Masek. Considerations for the design
of exergames. In GRAPHITE ’07: Proceedings of the 5th interna-
tional conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques in
Australia and Southeast Asia, pages 289–295, New York, NY, USA,
2007. ACM.
[25] B. K. Smith. Physical fitness in virtual worlds. Computer, 38:101–
103, 2005.
[26] G. Sugai and W. J. White. Effects of using object self-stimulation as a
reinforcer on the prevocational work rates of an autistic child. Journal
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 16(1):459–471, 1986.
[27] M. Van Bourgondien and G. Mesibov. Diagnosis and treatment of
adolescents and adults with autism. The Berkley Publishing Group,
New York: Guilford, autism: nature, diagnosis, and treatment edition,
1989.
[28] R. Watters and W. Watters. Decreasing self-stimulatory behavior with
physical exercise in a group of autistic boys. Journal of Autism and
Developmental disorders, 10(4):379–387, 1980.
[29] G. N. Yannakakis, J. Hallam, and H. H. Lund. Comparative fun analy-
sis in the innovative playware game platform. In 1st World Conference
for Fun ’n Games, pages 64–70, 2006.

