X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level 
Information From Social Media Data 
 
Xiaoyu Wang, Wenwen Dou, Zhiqiang Ma, Jeremy Villalobos, Yang Chen, Thomas Kraft, and William Ribarsky 
 
University of North Carolina at Charlotte  
 
 
 
Abstract 
We present a general visual analytics architecture that is constructed and implemented to effectively analyze un-
structured social media data on a large scale. Pipelined based on a high-performance cluster configuration, MPI 
processing, and interactive visual analytics interfaces, our architecture, I-SI, closely integrates data-driven analyti-
cal methods and user-centered visual analytics. It creates a coherent analysis environment for identifying event 
structures, geographical distributions, and key indicators of emerging events. This environment can support moni-
toring, analyzing, and responding to latent information extracted from social media.	   We have applied the I-SI ar-
chitecture to collect social media data, analyze the data on a large scale and uncover the latent social phenomena. 
To demonstrate the efficacy and applicability of I-SI, we describe several social media use cases in multiple do-
mains that were evaluated by experts. The use cases demonstrate that I-SI can benefit a range of users by construct-
ing meaningful event structures and identifying precursors to critical events within a rich, evolving set of topics. 
 
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): D.2.11 [Software Architectures]: Domain-specific 
architectures 
 
  
 
1. Motivation, Analysis Goal, and Challenges 
 
We are moving toward a ubiquitous social era, in which 
mobile communications, social technologies and sensor-
based services connect people, the Internet and the society 
into one immensely interconnected community. With the 
rapid growth of such ubiquitous communication infrastruc-
tures, we are living in a world where nearly everyone is 
connected in real time. Our society as a whole is being 
greatly influenced by such intimate connections, affecting 
every aspect of people’s social behaviors. Moreover, the 
evolution towards such interconnected, real-time social 
discourse has changed the way people organize and re-
spond to social events (e.g., happenings, protests or cam-
paigns), enabling people to form, share, discuss, and react 
to social activities instantaneously. 
 
    As a result of all this personalized, digital communica-
tion, massive amount of data, including both textual and 
multi-media data, are collected in real-time regarding who 
we are, where we are, and what we are talking about. Par-
ticularly, the emergence of microblogging has yielded an 
overwhelming amount of such data, ranging from status 
updates on Twitter and Facebook, to extended comments 
on Google+, all often accompanied by images and more 
and more by video. As one example of the explosive 
growth, Twitter rose from about 6 million visitors per 
month in January 2009 to over 37 million per month as of 
November 2011[Twi]. Based on multiple estimates, on an 
average day, users globally submit 140 million “tweets” on 
Twitter; and for each month, users share about 30 billion 
pieces of content on Facebook.  
 
These massive, large scale social media datasets bear ex-
tremely rich information that, if visualized, can lead to a 
profound impact on depicting patterns for emerging social 
events (and their underlying topics). This can contribute in 
new, important ways to the understanding of social phe-
nomena. The need to assess the related social phenomena in 
a systematic way has increased for both citizens and gov-
ernment (e.g. emergency responders and law enforcement). 
Analyzing this rich social media data gives them the ability 
to understand and even predict people’s interests, and to 
further depict the shifts and turns of social activity at the 
individual, group and global level. For example, analysis of 
social media could give government valuable information 
on how to effectively mitigate problematic situations (natu-
ral disasters or chaotic scenes). Citizens or citizen groups 
could learn about the development, history, and spread of 
ideas of social movements (e.g., Occupy Wall Street).  
 
1.1 Analysis Goal: Depicting Social Phenomena and 
Their Event Structure 
 
The key point of our research resides in the core analytical 
architecture that focuses on combining data-driven analyt-
ics methods with human-centered analytical approaches 
through the use of an interactive visual analytics interface. 
Eurographic Conference on Visualization (EuroVis) 2012       Volume 31 (2012), Number 3 
S. Bruckner, S. Miksch, and H. Pfister 
(Guest Editors) 
      
 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
Computer Graphics Forum © 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford 
OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA. 
 
Email to: xwang25 @uncc.edu 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
The process of collecting such data (microblogs), analyzing 
it on a large scale with data-driven technologies, and creat-
ing human-centered visual analytical environments, can be 
generalized across different domains.  
 
The analytics architecture promotes the interpretability of 
social phenomena, through presenting a platform for con-
ducting larger scale topic-level analysis. Scalability is quite 
important because these ever-changing, often streaming 
media, require constant observation and interaction with 
very large, dynamic data. A detailed description of the 
components of the architecture and its related analysis 
processes, along with the usable software tools, are the 
focus of this paper. 
 
1.2 Major Challenges and Opportunities 
 
Despite continual efforts, analyzing such large-scale, loose-
ly structured, and less-contextual social media data to 
support analytical reasoning remains extremely challeng-
ing. There is a scarcity of methods to extract the latent 
semantic information in the massive text corpora. Specifi-
cally, the challenges are two-fold: 
 
• Motivating Challenges I: Depict Latent Social Activi-
ties   
At an individual level, as streams of diverse information 
constantly bombard users, it is difficult for them to keep 
up with, let alone harvest important and interesting mes-
sages. In addition, a user might want to identify useful 
content outside of her selected focus, or to discover 
trendy topics that other people have been discussing on 
social media. This task involves not only a meaningful 
summary of vast information streams, but also the sup-
port for interactive exploration of content according to 
individual interests.  
At an organizational level, analyzing social media data 
streams allows institutions to grasp up-to-date topical 
trends and identify critical events that may require ap-
propriate action. For instance, a commercial organization 
might be interested in reviewing consumer responses to 
products or the company’s general image. Analyzing rel-
evant information from social media may be a better way 
to gather honest opinions from possible customers than 
conducting targeted surveys on a sample population. 
Similarly, campaign strategists might be interested in 
knowing people’s general opinions towards different par-
ties and politicians. Social media is a perfect place for 
collecting such data since large groups of users voice a 
rich set of attitudes over time and respond to events 
through Facebook or Twitter. 
In addition to the above examples, valuable information 
extracted from the noisy social media data could inform 
other entities such as emergency responders and police 
departments about future events that are being organized 
or current events as they unfold. 
• Motivating Challenges II: Establish Meaningful 
Social Event Structures  
Nowadays people do not need to be powerful to launch a 
successful media campaign thanks to social media. A 27-
year old art gallery owner started a national movement 
“Bank Transfer Day” against big banks through one Face-
book post [FAC]. The movement led more than 1 million 
customers (estimated) to transfer their cash out of big 
banks to credit unions. An on-going national campaign–
Occupy Wall Street–used social media abundantly to 
spread nationwide [CBS].  
The scale of such movements amazes people, but little is 
known regarding how they were initiated and organized. 
Through analyzing social media information related to 
the occupy movement, for example, one can construct a 
timeline or even an event structure to investigate the 
progression of the movement, and answer questions such 
as who were the initial organizers, who joined the cam-
paign at what time, when exactly did the movement start, 
what ideas and issues developed, and which events might 
have led to this massive national campaign. 
 
2.  Introducing I-SI Architecture 
 
In response to these challenges, we have developed a visual 
analytics architecture to support topical-level investigative 
analysis of social media data. Our architecture, I-SI, is 
centered on the combination of data-driven topic modeling 
approaches with human-centered visual analytics tech-
niques; topic modeling is enhanced by interactive visual 
interfaces, providing results that can be explored, filtered, 
and managed by users. I-SI creates a coherent analysis 
environment for identifying event structures, geographical 
distributions, and key indicators of emerging events. In 
other words, I-SI can help analysts identify and follow 
social phenomena as they emerge, evolve, and mature.   
 
    On the high-level, as shown in Figure 1, the data analyt-
ics capability of I-SI comes from leveraging High-
Performance clusters to apply automated topic modeling to 
social media data such as large collections of tweets. Ex-
tended on our previous work, ParallelTopics [DWCR11], 
Figure 4: An overview of I-SI architecture. There are 4 major components in the I-SI architecture: Distributed Data Storage 
and Pre-Processing (Section 4.1), Parallel Data Analytics Cluster (Section 4.2) ; Visual Data Transformation; Interactive 
Visual Interface (Sec. 4.3). 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
the visualization component of I-SI creates an investigative 
visual analytics environment [WMS*08] that not only 
provide a summary of “what happened” in terms of mean-
ingful topics, but also allow inferences of causal relation-
ships between a critical event and the effect of the event. In 
particular, our architecture could represent the progression 
of social events through underlying latent common themes 
over time, which allows users to discover the overall trend 
as well as rise and fall of individual social activities.  
 
We have currently applied the I-SI architecture to collec-
tions of unstructured social media data (e.g., Twitter data), 
analyzing the data on a large scale and uncovering the 
latent social phenomena (who-when-where-what-why). The 
results bring forth meaningful semantic information that is 
otherwise hidden in the large aggregation of noisy tweets. 
The results contain topics summarized based on the tweets; 
dynamic patterns of topics, and emerging events.  
 
We have reached out to multiple user communities, as 
detailed in Section 6.1. During this outreach, I-SI has been 
demonstrated to and evaluated by multiple users, including 
political campaign strategists and law enforcement experts. 
Feedback from these experts suggested that our I-SI archi-
tecture contributes to the social media analysis in the fol-
lows aspects: 
 
• Analyzing social media data on event/topical level in-
stead of keyword level. The cohesive themes from the 
otherwise noisy social media data are nicely summarized 
and presented to users. The purpose is to analyze and ul-
timately predict social activities/behaviors. 
• Ability to handle large amounts of data. Studies have 
seldom focused on analyzing social media data on a 
large scale. We have utilized parallel computing methods 
to handle billions of microblog messages at once. 
• Straightforward identification of critical events and even 
precursors to the events via temporal and geospatial vis-
ualization. In addition, through providing interactive ex-
ploration capabilities, the I-SI architecture enables users 
to perform investigative analysis regarding certain 
events/topics and answer who-what-where-when-why 
questions.  
 
3. Related Work 
 
There is a wide range of research on social media analysis, 
especially on Twitter data because of the public nature of 
tweets.  
 
3.1 Analysis of space and time in Social Media  
 
A large portion of the published research about Twitter has 
focused on questions related to Twitter’s spatial and tem-
poral properties with little or no semantic analysis on the 
textual content of tweets. For example, Java et al. [JSFT07] 
studied the topological and geographical properties of 
Twitter through constructing a social network based on 
users and their “friendship” information without consider-
ing content of tweets. More recently, MacEachren et al. 
[MJR*11] has developed SensePlace2 - a geovisual analyt-
ics system that supports situational awareness for crisis 
events using Twitter data. SensePlace2 focused on extract-
ing explicit and implicit geographic information for tweets, 
and combining geospatial with temporal information to 
promote understanding of situations evolving in space and 
time.  
 
3.2 Topical Analysis of Textual Content in Social Media 
 
Other work has presented analysis of the textual content of 
social media data.  
 
3.2.1 Identifying Relevant Content 
 
There has been numerous research on recommending, 
filtering and searching social media content [BSH?10, 
CNN*10, DCCC11]. Beinstein et al. [BSH?10] proposed a 
Twitter application called “Eddi” that organizes a user’s 
own feed into coherent clustered topics for more direction 
exploration. Chen et al. [CNN*10] explored content 
sources, topic interest models, and social voting as three 
separate dimensions for designing a recommender of social 
media content. To identify the most relevant content in 
social media, Choudhury et al. leveraged information di-
versity and user cognition [DCCC11]. Our work differs 
from these research in that not only we allow users to 
identify tweets based on topics, we also provide an over-
view that doesn’t limit a user to either search based on 
contents in her own Twitter stream or having to know what 
to look for in the first place. 
 
3.2.2 The Use of Topic Models 
 
Blei et al. introduce latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) in 
2003 [BNJ03]. The aim of LDA is to discover the hidden 
thematic structure in large archives of documents. Lots of 
content analysis was performed using LDA or extended 
versions of LDA. For example, Ramage et al. maps the 
content of the Twitter feed into dimensions using Labeled 
LDA [RDL10], with the four dimensions corresponding 
roughly to substance, style, status, and social characteristics 
of posts (4S). One limitation of the work comes from the 
authors manually assigning the predetermined labels (4S) 
to learned topics without leaving room for users to explore 
and attach other meanings to the topics. Ritter et al. have 
applied LDA and other unsupervised approaches for the 
purpose of modeling conversations within Twitter streams, 
as the sequential dialogue reflects the shape of communica-
tion in the online platform [RCD10]. More recently, Sizov 
proposed a framework, GeoFolk [Siz10], which combines 
textual content with spatial knowledge (e.g. geotags) to 
construct better algorithms for content management, re-
trieval, and sharing.  
 
3.3 Visual Analysis of Social Media Data  
 
Most of the aforementioned [JSFT07, RDL10, Siz10] work 
only focuses on data-driven techniques with a limited scale. 
Therefore, their objective and approach differs from our 
approach of combining both topic-level analysis and hu-
man-centered visual analytics methods. In the realm of 
interactive visualization, aside from SenseSpace2 
[MJR*11], researchers have presented systems to track on-
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
going social events and to support the use of social media 
as supplemental information sources for journalists 
[DGWC10,DNKS10].   
 
D?rk et al. introduced Topic Streams, a web-based inter-
active visualization system to follow and explore conversa-
tions on Twitter about large-scale events [DGWC10]. The 
authors also presented several design goals such as summa-
rizing the conversation, providing flexible time windows, 
etc, which are quite informative for future design. In addi-
tion, Diakopoulos et al. [DNKS10]  presented a visual 
analytics tool, Vox Civitas, to help journalists extract news 
value from social media content around broadcast events. 
The visualization component of the I-SI architecture differs 
from Topic Streams and Vox Civitas in defining topics.  As 
opposed to a keyword-based approach, we extract topics 
using LDA to pick out stronger and more cohesive themes 
from the entire social media corpus.  
 
4. I-SI: Scalable Architecture for Topical Analysis of 
Social Media Data 
  
In this section, we present our architecture and its imple-
mentation. Pipelined based on Hadoop servers, a high-
performance cluster configuration, MPI processing, and 
visual analytics interfaces, our architecture closely inte-
grates data-driven analytical methods and user-centered 
visual analytics. It creates a coherent analysis environment 
for identifying event structures, geographical distributions, 
and key indicators of emerging events. The core compo-
nents of our architecture include Data Collection, Data 
Cleaning, Topic Modeling, and finally Interactive Visual 
Analytics Interfaces. As shown in the overview pipeline 
(Figure 1), the benefit of our componentized modules is 
that the structure can incorporate more efficient and ad-
vanced analysis components to enrich the analytic capabil-
ity of the architecture. 
 
4.1 Distributed Data Storage and Pre-Processing Envi-
ronment 
  
As shown in Figure 1, our architecture aims at incorporat-
ing multiple sources of social media data such as Twitter 
updates, editorial news, and blogs. The heterogeneous and 
streaming nature of these data sources poses a significant 
challenge in data management schema and data cleaning.  
 
Given the scale of data that our architecture focuses on, 
standard SQL data management schema are not optimized 
to handle the I/O of different kinds of social media data. 
Specifically, considering the intrinsically fragmented and 
loosely structured nature of tweets, our architecture re-
quires a powerful distributed database processing approach 
to achieve sufficient data access and effective data pro-
cessing. After experimenting with several nuance NoSQL 
structures (e.g. Cassandra [CAS], MongoDB [MDB11]), 
we adopted the MapReduce framework [DG08], and con-
figured Hadoop [APA]  to provide an efficient and scalable 
distributed computing and data storage platform. HBase, an 
open-source realization built on the Hadoop Distributed 
File System (HDFS), is used in this platform to store the 
collected social media data.  
 
Besides providing a stable data management platform, 
we also utilized Hadoop to create a robust parallel data 
crawling and cleaning process. As shown in Figure 1, such 
process is interfaced with the Internet through multiple 
independent crawlers. Each of the crawlers constantly 
collects social media data from various public domains and 
dumps it into HBase. Specifically, we have created crawl-
ers to tap into Twitter’s public API to collect tweets. It 
acquires such information on the “Garden-hose” level, 
which constantly delivers 10% of tweets with a statistically 
significant sample of all contents [Twi]. As a result, we 
were able to collect over 3 Billion tweets from all lan-
guages over the course of 11 weeks, providing us a reliable 
database for our evaluation and outreach purposes. 
  
Concurrently, such textual data is being cleaned, parsed, 
and prepared for topic modeling through multiple 
Mapreduce jobs that perform these analytics tasks in the 
background. During these tasks, noise symbols and stop-
words are removed. Basic statistical analysis, such as word 
count, is also performed over the data, preparing for the 
topic modeling procedure. The implementation of both the 
data cleaning and basic statistical tasks contain two stages 
(i.e. map and reduce stages), detailed in the Algorithm 1. In 
the map stage, data is distributed into working nodes for 
intermediate computation; the output of the map stage 
follows the <key, value> pair format. After merging all the 
values with identical keys into an array, the merged inter-
mediate results are collected for further computation in 
reduce(s). The final output of the reduce(s) has the same 
<key, value> pair format as map’s. Extracted data is then 
stored into HDFS data repository and is distributed across 
multiple nodes within our Hadoop cluster to guarantee 
reliability. 
 
               
Algorithm 1. Map-Reduce Process for Data Cleaning. 
 
4.2 Parallel Topic Modeling using High-Performance 
Computing Cluster 
 
In order to have a comprehensive understanding about the 
latent social media data, one needs to extract and correlate 
information from massive amounts of data. With new 
tweets reaching a billion every five days, performing such 
analysis is beyond the scope of computing power of any 
single-node configuration, either it would be impossible to 
process the data (i.e. memory issues) or it would take too 
long to obtain analysis results. This suggests yet another 
Input: Text data from HBase storage 
Output: Cleaned data, frequencies of each distinct word in 
every document with its associated document ID 
Map stage:  
Create stop words hash table; 
Read input from HBase; 
Tokenize each line; 
Remove stop words; 
Output <docID+word, 1>; 
Reduce stage: 
Input <docID+word, [1, 1, …]>; 
Count the number of elements in the value of input value 
array [1,1,…] ;  
Output <docID, [word1+freq, word2+freq …]>; 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
significant scalability challenge in social media analysis. 
To alleviate such scalability issues, our architecture in-
corporates the use of a high-performance cluster to 
strengthen the analytical capability over the social media 
data. In particular, once the data has been cleaned and 
stored in HDFS, it is then ready to be processed by parallel 
computing clusters for topical-level analysis. Such a pro-
cess has its most notable performance bottleneck at the 
learning and inference stages [NEW06]. In order to reduce 
the time to complete this stage, we extend on Google's 
PLDA MPI implementation [PLD]. The algorithm is a 
general implementation of LDA with parallelization im-
plemented into key portions of the algorithm. Such a pro-
cess utilizes Gibbs Sampling, a Monte Carlo approach, to 
compute the result towards a conversion point as the num-
ber of iterations increase.  
 
During this process, we use Portable Batch System 
(PBS) to schedule the jobs and the Message Passing Inter-
face (MPI) is used to make parallel use of the cluster nodes. 
As shown in Figure 1, each node of our cluster has 12 cores 
and a total of 36GB of memory, with a fast Gigabit Ether-
net to communicate results. Our cluster converts the input 
data (e.g. tweets) into output data (topic-based probabilistic 
information), using LDA to create a probabilistic model 
that uses the documents, the words, and their utterances to 
build the topic model.  The benefit of using such infrastruc-
ture is two-fold:  
 
• We can now process the social media on a scale that a 
single node computer would not be able to handle. Such 
infrastructure and its parallelized algorithm granted us to 
capability to peek into the topics that are embedded in 
the large unstructured text corpus. For example, we have 
tested the I-SI architecture to investigate topics from 
17,651,186 English tweets, roughly around 1.8Gb data 
over the course of 5 weeks (after data cleaning).  
• This setup reduces the processing time for data in the 
range of 150mb to 300mb, providing our architecture the 
iterative capability to search most interpretable topic 
modeling results. This would be important for certain 
critical response situations such as presented in Scenario 
I and III (see section 5.1 and 5.3). 
 
4.3 Visual Data Transformation and Interactive Visual 
Interfaces 
 
To support the analysis needs from different user communi-
ties, we designed a coordinated multiple-view interface to 
create an interactive visual analytics environment. Each 
view is designed via transforming the output from topic 
models to showcase one distinct aspect of the underlying 
social media data. 
 
   As shown in Figure 1, the I-SI interface is designed to 
support understanding of spatial and temporal patterns of 
social activities, identification of event structures, and 
topical trends through analysis of the growing social media 
database. A key goal for these interfaces is to permit users 
to interactively explore, characterize, and compare the 
space-time aspects associated with topics in tweets. The 
default interface includes a topic cloud view, temporal and 
geospatial views, and detailed text view. Tight coupling 
between these views via interactive techniques permits this 
interface to effectively visualize highly dynamic and frag-
mented social media data. The four primary display views 
are dynamically coordinated. Each view is introduced 
below and their coordination is further discussed. 
Topic Cloud: revealing major topics. We present the 
topics as a tagcloud for quick overview/summary of the 
social media corpus. In the topic cloud, each line displays a 
topic, which consists of multiple keywords. The order of 
the keywords within a topic indicates their importance to 
the topic. In addition, since one keyword may appear in 
multiple topics, the size of each keyword reflects its num-
ber of occurrences within all topics. 
 
Temporal View: presenting topic evolution. The tem-
poral view is created as an interactive ThemeRiver 
[HHN00], with each ribbon representing a topic. The length 
of the time frame in the ThemeRiver can be changed by 
users based on their investigative needs. Similar to previ-
ously developed topic-based text methods [WLS*10], 
tweets are divided into corresponding time units based on 
their time stamps after the time frame has been chosen; 
then the height of each ribbon is calculated by summing the 
number of tweets in each time unit.  
 
Geospatial View: displaying geographical distributions. 
We utilize Google Map [GOO] to provide users with inter-
active geospatial analysis (see Figure 1). By placing the 
tweets with geo-tagging (i.e. GPS location associated with 
tweets) onto the scalable map, detailed geographic relation-
ships and patterns immediately become apparent. In addi-
tion, we extended Google Map to effectively display the 
topical distributions of the social media data. The geospa-
tial view incorporates a client-side clustering algorithm to 
overlay large amounts of geo-coordinated tweets over the 
map, creating a density Heatmap [SMKH05] to show the 
tweet clusters.  
 
View coordination and interactions Since investigative 
analysis of social activities may involve the utilization of 
all views, coordination among the views is supported. On 
the topic level, hovering over a ribbon in the temporal view 
would highlight the corresponding topic in the topic cloud 
so that users could quickly synthesize information regard-
ing topic content and temporal trend. On the temporal 
level, filtering tweets that were posted within a certain time 
period is supported. A user could further filter tweets by 
geospatial area and topics. For instance, clicking on an 
intersection of a topic ribbon and a time frame in the tem-
poral view would lead to the selection of tweets that are 
highly related to the topic and posted during the time peri-
od. These selections support detailed examination of topical 
trends and events.  
 
5. Case Study 
 
To demonstrate the efficacy and applications of I-SI, we 
describe three scenarios based on analysis of social media 
data. In these scenarios, the I-SI architecture supported 
summarizing a large amount of social media information 
and interactive exploration of the generated topical trends. 
More specifically, the scenarios demonstrated that the 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
interactive analysis could distill meaningful and otherwise 
hidden information from noisy social media data, such as 
revealing critical events and pre-cursors of such events.  
 
5.1 Scenario I: Depict Meaningful Event Structures  
 
The Occupy movement is an ongoing series of demonstra-
tions and is known for using social media to attract more 
protestors. The Occupy movement is long-lasting and 
widely spread; people in almost every major city within the 
U.S. and around the world have joined it and created other 
related protests such as Occupy Seattle, Occupy London, 
etc. The challenge in understanding such a movement lies 
in distilling the main topics and trends from a movement 
with massive participation and a wide range of goals such 
as more and better jobs, more equal distribution of income, 
bank reform, and a reduction of the influence of corpora-
tions on politics [RUS11]. Given the prominent use of 
social media in organizing the Occupy movement, it should 
be possible to summarize and analyze how the movement 
unfolded through analysis of these media.  
 
5.1.1 Data collection and preparation 
Since we want to focus on the Occupy movement in this 
scenario, we further filtered for all tweets with hashtag 
#occupy from our tweet collection. A hashtag is a Twitter 
convention used to simplify search and indexing. Users 
include specially designed terms starting with # into the 
body of each post. The resulting dataset includes more than 
100,000 tweets starting from Aug 19 to Nov 01. Our archi-
tecture then automatically removed stopwords and per-
formed topic modeling. Such automated process enables us 
to experiment with different numbers of topics, and results 
in the choice of 15 topics for interpretability.  
 
5.1.2 Investigating the Occupy movement 
 
Exploring the unfolding of Occupy movement. Our 
analysis environment enables users to explore and follow 
the evolution of the movement. As the user, a campaign 
strategist, inspected topics in the temporal view, she no-
ticed that this movement had been evolving gradually over 
the course of two months. This trend had been exemplified 
by two significant forces joining the Occupy movement. 
Specifically, as shown in figure 2 (yellow topic), marines 
joined the Occupy Wall Street (OWS) movement to protect 
the protestors from the police on Oct 1. The user reached 
this conclusion by selecting tweets related to the topic of 
interests within the burst of topic volume for this event (see 
Figure 2). She noticed that people were shouting out on 
Twitter about this event: “…the marines coming to protect 
protestors” and “marine - 2nd time fought for my country 
time 1st time I’ve know my enemy”. 
  
A similar pattern was also seen for another topic, which 
suddenly gains momentum as the NYC transit union work-
ers joining OWS (shown in figure 2, purple topic). People 
sounded excited on Twitter about the event: “200 000 
transport workers union votes support!!!”, “new york trans-
it workers union voted unanimously support #occup-
wallstreet. 38000 active march oct. 5”. More interestingly, 
based on reading the last tweet, the user suspected there 
might be an organized march on Oct 5. Indeed, another big 
increase in volume of the same topic occurred on Oct 5, 
and the tweets were related to the march though the Finan-
cial District of Wall Street, which was joined by thousands 
of union workers. 
 
Identifying pre-cursor to the Occupy movement. In 
addition to identifying meaningful events based on the 
sudden topical volume change in the ThemeRiver, our 
analysis environment also enables users to construct a 
comprehensive story by looking at the overall movement. 
As shown in figure 3, the overall volume of tweets with 
“#occupy” became significant around Sep 17, 2011, which 
is the protestors’ self-proclaimed start date of the move-
ment. However, our temporal view clearly indicated rele-
vant tweets were posted well before Sep 17, dating all the 
way back to Aug 19, 2011 (highlighted region in figure 3).  
 
   This unique pattern could suggest a pre-cursor to the 
Occupy movement, and motivated the user to look further 
into the details of the tweets. With our coordinated views, 
she was able to directly click on each time frame to inspect 
tweets one time step at a time. Upon reading the tweets, the 
user immediately realized that the OWS was a well-
organized event. Specifically, organizers had been using 
Twitter to advertise the upcoming event and to raise media 
attention as early as Sep 11, with tweets stating: “trainings! 
medic! legal support! communication training. facilitator 
trainer #occupywallstreet #sept17”. As the actual event 
(Sep 17th) drew near, the organizers were giving more 
specific instructions, as they posted on the 14th :“bringing 
tent sleeping bag food water to new york this weekend!” 
Figure 2: Difference forces joined the Occupy Wall Street movement. Highlighted portion of the yellow topic -marine joined 
to movement to protect the protestors from the police. Highlighted portion of the purple topic – union workers voted to 
support the OWS movement. 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
And even on the early morning of the 17th, protestors were 
provided maps of how to get to Zuccotti Park: “hashtags 
user-friendly time-table map uploaded”. At this point, it 
became obvious that the initial protest was orchestrated by 
a group of organizers.  
To seek the possible origin of the movement, the user 
kept retracing the tweets published earlier than the 14th and 
noticed that there were other hashtags that frequently co-
occur with #occupywallstreet during the first few days of 
the movement. These hashtags include: #usdayofrage, 
#yeswecamp, #nyccamp, etc. At this point, the user could 
carry the investigation further by looking into tweets with 
these hashtags around that time. Such observation was 
validated by recent Wikipedia’s updates on Occupy move-
ment where the U.S. Day of Rage (#usdayofrage) was 
considered the governing body of the OWS group [IBT]. 
 
In summary, the I-SI framework supports the analysis of 
social media data regarding the Occupy movement. The 
backend topic modeling plus frontend interactive visualiza-
tion supports investigative analysis of the otherwise unor-
ganized and noisy information, and enables the answering 
of questions such as how did the movement evolve, which 
forces joined the movement at which time, are there any 
precursors to the Sep 17th protest, etc. As detailed in Sec-
tion 6.2, the implication of this finding can be significant to 
public safety personnel in that, if they are able to acquire 
the key indicators hours/days before the protest, they can 
develop a better oversight and management strategy. 
 
5.2 Scenario II: Establishing Investigative Analysis  
 
We use this scenario to demonstrate the scalability of our 
architecture, demonstrating that the I-SI interactive analysis 
environment allows users the capability to tap into relevant 
data on a large scale. Over 12 million tweets were exam-
ined over the course of three weeks, with 30 topics extract-
ed for interpretability. Unlike the previous scenario, these 
tweets were not filtered by hashtag. Thus exploration of the 
dataset will permit it to tell the user what it is about. 
 
In this scenario, a summer research intern began by exam-
ining this tweet collection to discover interesting events he 
might have missed during the past few weeks. Upon high-
lighting different ribbons in the ThemeRiver (When) view, 
he notes that the cyan ribbon (see Figure 4) exhibits a 
unique temporal pattern. A closer examination of the time-
line reveals a volume burst around Sep 10, suggesting more 
tweets were related to this topic within that time period.  
The student then associates this timeline view with the 
topic cloud view (What), and finds that the topic refers to 
science and NASA. This becomes very interesting to the 
student, who happens to be an enthusiast in astrophysics. 
Quickly he references the tweets with their geospatial 
location on the map (Where) view. He observes that the 
mention of such event is mostly centered in Orlando, FL, 
where one of NASA’s launching sites is located. Further 
browsing through the actual tweets suggests that people 
(Who) across the country are excited about this event. At 
this point, the student has linked all these investigative 
hints together and checked into the news database to find 
media coverage. He then correctly concludes that the event 
is the NASA GRAIL launch on Sep 10 to study the moon 
from crust to core.  
 
   The investigation in this scenario included all four of the 
W’s and ended in the correct hypothesis of how a single 
space event could stir discussion and may inspire people 
toward scientific activities. It uncovers the cause (an event) 
of a certain volume burst in large-scale social media data 
and clarifies the trend and pattern of social phenomena. 
 
5.3 Scenario III: Identifying Epidemic Spread 
 
In this scenario, we demonstrate how I-SI can support 
investigation of the spread of an epidemic and pinpoint 
when the epidemic happened by analyzing microblog 
messages. 
 
5.3.1 Data Source and Data Preparation  
 
In contrast to the other two scenarios, the dataset in this 
case is provided by the VAST Challenge committee [VCO]. 
The dataset contains more than a million microblog mes-
sages collected within a major metropolitan area, over the 
course of a month. While synthetic, this dataset can be a 
great benchmark for its careful integration of the epidemic 
theme, the investigation of which requires robust analysis 
capability since the epidemic is buried in a mass of irrele-
vant microblog data. This VAST challenge is also a great 
evaluation of our I-SI environment, since it permits com-
paring the patterns observed from the visualization inter-
face with the ground truth that comes with the dataset.  
 
   Relying on the robust text analytics capability in I-SI, we 
were able to effectively perform topic modeling over this 
textual corpus, with a vocabulary of 13,284 unique terms. 
10 topics were extracted and visualized from the corpus 
after several experiments of topical interpretability.  
  Figure 4: Topical burst indicates NASA’s moon mission. 
Figure 3: Precursor to the Occupy movement. People 
started to organize and advertise the event way before the 
official beginning date of Sep 17. 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
 
5.3.2 Characterizing Epidemic Spread 
 
As shown in Figure 5, the temporal patterns of the ten 
extracted topics are presented in our ThemeRiver view over 
the course of a month. Each time unit in the figure denotes 
4 hours, which is adjustable to support inspection of differ-
ent temporal granularities. Upon exploration of the tem-
poral view, one can easily discover that multiple topics 
share a repetitive characteristic, such as the repeating men-
tions of TV shows every night (un-highlighted topic in red).  
 
What really attracted the users’ attention, however, is 
the sudden disappearance of the repetitive patterns during 
the last 3 days. Instead emerging topics in that time frame 
were about flu-like symptoms, such as “cold, headache, 
fatigue, sweats, etc.” (see orange topic in Figure 5)  and 
“pneumonia, diarrhea, cough, etc.” (see yellow topic in 
Figure 5). These two topics signify exactly when the out-
break has begun. Moreover, our temporal view clearly 
suggested a progression of the illness from cold and head-
ache to more serious symptoms, such as pneumonia, diar-
rhea and difficult breathing, since the orange topic stream 
appeared before the yellow topic stream. The results con-
form to the ground truth provided by the challenge commit-
tee. Finally, with the ability to pinpoint when the epidemic 
has begun, one can further conclude that the disease did not 
seem to be contained based on the volume of the yellow 
topic in the last day. Therefore, if the microblogs were 
collected and analyzed as the epidemic unfolded, the results 
could inform emergency responders to take actions to 
prevent the disease from spreading. 
 
In summary, our I-SI architecture supports processing 
and analysis of the microblog messages. Though interactive 
exploration of the visualization results, a user could suc-
cessfully identify latent information regarding the outbreak 
and depict temporal patterns of the epidemic spread. 
 
6. Preliminary User Feedback 
 
Compared to typical visual analytics evaluations, we rec-
ognize the challenges in conducting thorough evaluation of 
the I-SI architecture. This evaluation process, to bring it to 
completeness, may require experts from multiple research 
domains to collaboratively examine the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the scalable architecture. We believe that 
any findings from such evaluation would be of tremendous 
value; yet, conducting it can be a longitudinal process that 
needs more strategic consideration and explanation that 
beyond the scope of this paper.  
 
Instead of focusing on evaluating the architecture as a 
whole, we seek users’ understanding about the analysis 
environments that our architecture enables. In this section, 
we report user feedback based on several preliminary user 
evaluations with our investigative visual analysis interfac-
es. These evaluations were conducted to assess the effec-
tiveness and efficiency of such an interface in supporting 
understanding latent social phenomena such as the three 
case studies shown above.  
 
In particular, we report our interactions with three groups 
of experts in political campaign planning (CP) (5 experts), 
finance (4 analysts) and emergency response (3 lead ex-
perts). While the evaluations were conducted informally, 
these outreach activities granted us a sufficient amount of 
time to introduce our architecture and its visual interfaces 
as well to gather their feedback. First we presented our 
system by demonstrating the investigative scenarios de-
scribed in the previous section. Then the experts were given 
some time to ask questions regarding the system and the 
interface. Finally, we concluded the evaluation by asking 
them to give feedback and comments. Given privacy con-
cerns, we are removing all these experts’ affiliations. How-
ever, they all agreed to have their comments published in 
this paper. 
 
6.1 Monitor and Analyze Social Phenomena  
 
One of the benefits that all these experts see in the I-SI 
architecture is its capability in helping to depict latent 
social phenomena that are otherwise hidden in the data. 
Especially to CP strategists, who are responsible for ana-
lyzing hundreds of political blogs and news on a daily 
basis, the capability to identify and summarize the latent 
topics from their data is of great value. One of the experts 
mentioned that, “this tool is very exciting in that it could 
give me a way to effectively assess what people are talking 
about with regard to political events.” He further comment-
ed that this would provide a great baseline analysis for their 
strategic planning work, “where [their] line of business is 
about finding the right people and talking about the right 
things”.  
 
While the analysis environment was well received, one 
of the CP experts pointed out that trust issues and uncer-
tainty might affect analysis outcomes. Given the accuracy 
needed in the CP’s work, they were interested in learning 
Figure 5: Identifying the start of an epidemic spread. The orange topic captures flu-like symptoms, which bursts on day 1. 
The yellow topic shows on the next day, the symptoms have evolved to more severe ones such as pneumonia and diarrhea. 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
how they can effectively validate the outcomes of the 
overall analysis architecture. The validations and quantifi-
cation of analysis outcomes is certainly a crucial future 
direction as we continue enriching our architecture. Of 
course, it would be possible to validate a particular topical 
outcome by merely reading enough of the blog entries 
organized around that topic, but it would be good to have 
the visualizations of the automated results show this at once 
or with limited probing of details. Otherwise the approach 
is not scalable. 
 
6.2 Potentially be Proactive to Key Event Indicators 
 
As mentioned in scenario I (section 5.1), the I-SI architec-
ture helped depict key event indicators for the Occupy 
movement. This capability is highly appreciated by emer-
gency responders; and our results demonstrated great po-
tential in facilitating their duties. The ER experts we inter-
viewed were very excited to see the system in action. One 
of them indicated that the potential of having I-SI in their 
working environment could not only help them “follow up 
with what they knew”, but also raise their awareness on 
“what they didn’t expect”. One usage case they pictured to 
use our system is for proactive measures for political 
events. They would like to utilize our tool to deploy their 
manpower in more targeted directions.  
 
Due to the “limited resources (financially and personal-
wise)”, an ER manager mentioned that, “we can’t respond 
to every small indicator that the system provided us.” This 
requires our architecture to be able to perform more com-
prehensive event structuring, producing more a hierarchy 
with key indicators. His comment is well received, and we 
are working extensively on researching a quantifiable event 
structuring metric for ascertaining where attention is need-
ed and resources should be deployed. 
 
6.3 Follow the Influence of Social Events 
 
Based on our interaction with marketing experts, one of 
their strongly emerging interests is utilizing the social 
media data to depict marketing impacts that are generated 
by certain social events. They see our architecture could 
potentially help them to follow their customer base, and 
understand their interests. As summarized by one of the 
experts, “this system ties the marketing loop back to us…It 
could help us to find a targeted audience and pursue that 
market with customized approaches”.  
 
While we demonstrated our data connection between 
structured data (e.g. GPS locations) and unstructured text, 
the further fusion of heterogeneous data is another im-
portant aspect for which these experts would like to have 
further evaluation. In particular, they are interested in 
learning how we could effectively associate information 
from different text corpora. This should certainly be doable 
at the topic level. 
 
7. Limitations 
 
There are limitations to this research that need to be ad-
dressed. The current analytics capability of our architecture 
is limited because this research was conducted within the 
specific Natural Language Processing area of topic model-
ing. We attempted to mitigate this limitation by componen-
tizing our architecture, which opens up opportunities to 
incorporate other text analytics methods such as sentiment 
analysis and named entity recognition. Nevertheless, differ-
ent characteristics, other natural language processing algo-
rithms, and their scalability constraints could engender 
different analytical environments.  
 
In addition, we undertook this architectural research to 
depict information of social media data from an analysis 
perspective. Our data management schema, which resides 
in Hadoop clusters, is still preliminary. We are in the pro-
cess of determining more comprehensive data collecting 
and integration schema to handle the ever-growing com-
plexity and scale of social media data.  An important bene-
fit of integrating an optimization process into our architec-
ture is the potential for improved efficiency of the infra-
structure, allowing informed resource management, avoid-
ing replicated work. 
 
The presented architecture illuminates the strong role 
that a combined approach of data-driven modeling algo-
rithms and user-center visual analytics plays in revealing 
the latent phenomena within complex social media. It is our 
hope that by identifying these system limitations, the re-
search fields of visual analytics, parallel computing and 
databases might be brought together, providing scalable 
solutions for social media analysts and new techniques for 
revolutionizing the analysis environments.  
 
8. Future Work and Conclusion 
 
In the future, we would like to enrich each component 
within the I-SI architecture. For the cluster computing, we 
would like to optimize LDA parallel processing algorithm 
and further improve its scalability and efficiency. As for the 
data analytics stage, we would like to add in techniques 
such as sentiment analysis and named entity recognition to 
automatically extract more information other than semantic 
topics from social media data.  
 
In this paper, we presented a visual analytics architecture, 
I-SI, to effectively analyze unstructured social media data 
on a large scale. I-SI integrates data driven analytics meth-
ods such as topic modeling with human-centered visual 
analytics, via an interactive visual interface. We demon-
strate multiple investigative visual analysis environments 
that I-SI is able to provide for monitoring, analyzing, and 
potentially enabling response to latent topical information 
extracted from social media. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
We express our sincere appreciations to the domain experts 
for their valuable feedback. We would also like to thank 
supports by the National Science Foundation under award 
number SBE-0915528 and IIS-1019160. Any opinions, 
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in 
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 
 
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.    
 
X.Wang & W. Dou et al. / I-SI: Scalable Architecture of Analyzing Latent Topical-Level Information From Social Media Data 
References 
 
[APA] APACHE HADOOP [online]:. http://hadoop.apache.org. 4 
  
[BNJ03] BLEI D. M., NG A. Y., JORDAN M. I.: Latent dirichlet 
allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3 (Mar. 2003), 993– 1022. 3 
 
[BSH*10] BERNSTEIN M. S., SUH B., HONG L., CHEN J., 
KAIRAM S., CHI E. H.: Eddi: interactive topic-based browsing 
of social status streams. In Proceedings of the 23nd annual 
ACM symposium on User interface software and technology 
(New York, NY, USA, 2010), UIST ’10, ACM, pp. 303– 312. 2 
 
[CAS] Apache Cassandra Project. http://cassandra.apache.org/. 4 
 
[CBS] CBS News Online. URL:http://www.cbsnews.com/8301- 
501465_162-20117291-501465.html, Oct 7, 2011. 2 
 
[CNN*10] CHEN J., NAIRN R., NELSON L., BERNSTEIN M., 
CHI E.: Short and tweet: experiments on recommending content 
from information streams. In Proceedings of the 28th interna- 
tional conference on Human factors in computing systems (New 
York, NY, USA, 2010), CHI ’10, ACM, pp. 1185–1194. 2 
 
[DCCC11] DE CHOUDHURY M., COUNTS S., CZERWINSKI 
M.: Identifying relevant social media content: leveraging infor-
ma- tion diversity and user cognition. In Proceedings of the 
22nd ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia (New 
York, NY, USA, 2011), HT ’11, ACM, pp. 161–170. 2 
 
[DG08] DEAN J., GHEMAWAT S.: Mapreduce: simplified data 
processing on large clusters. Commun. ACM 51, 1 (Jan. 2008), 
107–113. 4 
 
[DGWC10] DORK M., GRUEN D., WILLIAMSON C., 
CARPENDALE S.: A visual backchannel for large-scale events. 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 16 
(2010), 1129–1138. 4. 
 
[DNKS10] DIAKOPOULOS N., NAAMAN M., KIVRAN-
SWAINE F.: Diamonds in the rough: Social media visual ana-
lytics for journalistic inquiry. In Visual Analytics Science and 
Technology (VAST), 2010 IEEE Symposium on (oct. 2010), 
pp. 115 –122. doi:10.1109/VAST.2010.5652922. 4 
 
[DWCR11] DOU W., WANG X., CHANG R., RIBARSKY W.: 
Paralleltopics: A probabilistic approach to exploring document 
collections. In Visual Analytics Science and Technology 
(VAST), 2011 IEEE Conference on (oct. 2011), pp. 231 –240. 
doi: 10.1109/VAST.2011.6102461. 2 
 
[FAC] Christian K.’ facebook page [online]: 
http://www.facebook.com/Nov.Fifth, Nov 5 2011. 2  
 
[GOO] Google Map 2012 [online]: URL: http://map.google.com. 5 
 
[HHN00] HAVRE S., HETZLER B., NOWELL L.: Themeriver: 
visualizing theme changes over time. In Information Visualiza-
tion, 2000. InfoVis 2000. IEEE Symposium on (2000), pp. 115 
–123. 5 
 
[IBT] Ibtimes report [online]. URL: http://newyork. 
ibtimes.com/articles/215511/20110917/occupy-wall-street-new-
york-saturday-protest. htm. 7 
 
[JSFT07] JAVA A., SONG X., FININ T., TSENG B.: Why we 
twitter: understanding microblogging usage and communities. 
In Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 
workshop on Web mining and social network analysis (New 
York, NY, USA, 2007), WebKDD/SNA-KDD ’07, ACM, pp. 
56– 65. 3 
 
[MJR*11] MACEACHREN A., JAISWAL A., ROBINSON A., 
PEZANOWSKI S., SAVELYEV A., MITRA P., ZHANG X., 
BLANFORD J.: Senseplace2: Geotwitter analytics support for 
situational awareness. In Visual Analytics Science and Tech-
nology (VAST), 2011 IEEE Conference on (oct. 2011), pp. 181-
190. 3,4 
 
[MON] MongoDB [online]: URL: http://www.mongodb.org/. 4 
 
[NEW06] NEWMAN D., SMYTH P., STEYVERS M.: Scalable 
parallel topic models (2006). Journal of Intelligence Communi-
ty Research and Development (2006). 5  
 
[PLD] Google pld [online]: http://code.google.com/p/plda/. 4 
 
[RCD10] RITTER A., CHERRY C., DOLAN, B.: Unsupervised 
modeling of Twitter conversations. In Human Language Technol-
ogies: The 2010 Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (HLT’10), 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA (2010). 3 
 
[RDL10] RAMAGE D., DUMAIS S., LIEBLING D.: Characteriz-
ing microblogs with topic models. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth-International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media, AAAI (2010). 3 
 
[RUS11] RUSKOFF D. : Occupy wallstreet report [online]. Octo-
ber 2011. URL: http://www.cnn.com/2011/10/05/ opin-
ion/rushkoff- occupy- wall- street/index. html. 6 
 
[Siz10] SIZOV S.: Geofolk: latent spatial semantics in web 2.0 
social media. In Proceedings of the third ACM international 
conference on Web search and data mining (New York, NY, 
USA, 2010), WSDM ’10, ACM, pp. 281–290. 4 
 
[SMKH05] SLOCUCM T., MCMASTER R., KESSLER F., and 
HOWARD H. Thematic Cartography and Visualization. Pear-
son Prentice 2005. 6 
 
[Twi ] TWITTER:. http://www.Twitter.com. 4 
 
[VCO] VAST Challenge Committee 2011[online]: 
http://hcil.cs.umd.edu/localphp/hcil/vast11/. 8 
 
[WLS*10] WEI F., LIU S., SONG Y., PAN S., ZHOU M. X., 
QIAN W., SHI L., TAN L., ZHANG Q.: Tiara: a vi- sual ex-
ploratory text analytic system. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM 
SIGKDD international conference on Knowl- edge discovery 
and data mining (New York, NY, USA, 2010), KDD ’10, ACM, 
pp. 153–162. 2 
 
[WMS*08] WANG X., MILLER E., SMARICK K., RIBARSKY 
W., CHANG R.: Investigative visual analysis of global terror-
ism. In Computer Graphics Forum (2008), Computer Graphics 
Forum, pp. 919–926. 3 
 
 
 
  
© 2012 The Author(s) 
© 2012 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.  
 

