The Whole Story: Building the Complete History of a Place 
 
William Ribarsky 
The Charlotte 
Visualization Center 
UNC Charlotte 
ribarsky@uncc.edu 
Eric Sauda 
School of 
Architecture 
UNC Charlotte 
ejsauda@uncc.edu 
Zachary Wartell 
The Charlotte 
Visualization Center 
UNC Charlotte 
zwartell@uncc.edu 
Jeffery Balmer 
School of 
Architecture 
UNC Charlotte 
jdbalmer@uncc.edu
Abstract 
In this paper, we discuss how one can build a 
visual analytics system to comprehensively describe a 
place throughout its many interconnected histories. We 
discuss the needed 4D data structure, the analytics 
techniques, and the interactive visualizations. This 
combination of automated and interactive techniques 
can be brought together into a new, powerful 
capability. We focus on the example of Rome and, 
more specifically, on its architectural/cultural history.  
 
1. Introduction  
 
The founding of cities coincided with the rise of 
human civilization and systems of law, written 
language, organized religion and economic exchange.  
History was always written with awareness of a 
particular place, whether it was its political history, 
military history, or a description of its great men. Great 
cities (Babylon, Athens, Rome, Alexandria) evolved 
into city-states, regions around the city, and eventually 
into empires. Only since the renaissance have nation 
states arisen and histories been written about the 
politics, governments, and military outcomes of these 
larger and more diffuse entities. Lately, there have 
arisen many other threads of the history of a place: 
social history, cultural history, history of common life, 
architectural history, history in terms of natural events 
that affect the lives of the population, and so on. It is 
obvious that these histories are all intertwined and 
interconnected. If we could read them together, we 
would gain extraordinary new insights and knowledge 
about how and why a place changed. 
In this paper, we investigate how this whole story 
of a place can be built by considering a concrete 
example, the city of Rome. Rome has been alive for 
nearly three millennia and has been a prodigious center 
of political, social, and religious life for over two 
millennia. Think of all that has been written about 
Rome, all the paintings and drawings that have been 
created, all the maps and views of the city that have 
been made over the centuries. Think of all the records 
kept by imperial, state, and local governments and by 
the church over the millennia. Think of the 
archaeological evidence that is still being uncovered, 
that exists in layers under present churches and public 
buildings. Think of the geographic and geologic record 
of the Tiber as it ebbed and flowed over the centuries. 
Think of the story of the surrounding lands and all the 
weather that has enveloped the city and its effects on 
human records and geology. Almost all of these things 
have a location, a region, or a range in space and time. 
They can thus be incorporated (and organized) into a 
virtual world model, and then cause and effect relations 
inferred via their proximity in time and space and via 
the nature and meaning of these things.  
There is an incredibly large and bewildering 
amount of information about Rome in words, pictures, 
maps, and other media. Whole libraries are devoted to 
just one portion of this story. How can we make the 
story complete; make it look like one integrated thing? 
The methods of visual analytics, coupling interactive 
visualization with data analytics and analytical 
reasoning, can show the way. Now available are a 
collection of interactive data analysis methods that fit 
well with interactive visualization. These methods 
include topic modeling for large text collections [1], 
image understanding for large image collections [2], 
extraction of 3D geometry (e.g., building location, 
shapes, volumes) from perspective images [3], GIS 
methods to extract and organize meaningful layers 
from maps, and other computer vision techniques that, 
for example, can understand unstructured video or 
precisely locate detailed snapshots of scenes. 
This organized information, plus numerical or other 
data on physical events, provides the comprehensive 
picture of Rome we seek. We can then construct a 4D 
virtual world model (4D GIS) to bring everything 
together in its proper relationship. In this case, the 
result will ultimately be a comprehensive, accessible 
organization of very nearly everything that has been 
recorded and observed about Rome. This space-time 
GIS will have the efficiency of a normal GIS but will 
be much more extensive and powerful. One might ask 
of it, for example, what major events occurred in 
Trastevere in a given time period and whether they 
were related to events across the Tiber in the imperial 
district. Or the system could automatically set up an 
event time line for the whole area or any subarea. But 
this time line would not be the usual inert 
representation; it could be made to show all events of a 
certain importance, not just, say, political or military 
events. For example, one could see a major flood or 
plague event near social or political events that might 
indicate upheaval. This might reveal a relation that was 
hidden before. The timeline would be interactive and 
responsive. Major events could be opened up to 
indicate a detailed history. Selection of any event 
would indicate its spatial extent and, if dynamic, its 
movement on the spatial view. Choosing related events 
at different times for the same area would show 
interesting patterns of development or evolution. 
Selection of major building events on a timeline 
representing an area of the imperial city could show 
how medieval, renaissance, and modern buildings were 
erected on the imperial sites, sometimes directly on top 
of earlier structures, or around them, as happened with 
some medieval churches. These structures could be 
shown simultaneously, using semi-transparent 
representations of the buildings. The result would be 
comprehensive, novel views of the history of an area. 
One could follow multiple, intertwined bundles of 
narrative arcs for any aspect of the city.  
In this paper, we discuss how one might build this 
visual analytics system to comprehensively describe a 
place throughout its history. We will discuss the 
needed 4D data structure, the analytics techniques, and 
the interactive visualizations. We will focus on the 
example of Rome and on its architectural/cultural 
history. However, the approach proposed here could be 
extended to the other histories of Rome and, indeed, to 
other cities or nations. Our purpose in this paper is not 
to present a complete system; but rather to present the 
ideas and methods required to build such a system. 
 
2. Relevant Work 
 
Two key requirements for our vision are efficient 
storage and query of 3D spatial-temporal data and 
automated extraction of events that are meaningful to 
the end-users (historians, etc.). Both the historical data 
and the events themselves must be efficiently stored 
and queryable. A database access method is the set of 
algorithms and data structures (or the index) that 
support these queries. Database access methods 
support data sets that exceed in-core capacity. Many 
temporal access methods (TAM) and spatial access 
methods (SAM) are available and are now 
implemented in temporal [4] and spatial databases [5]. 
A large number of spatial-temporal access methods 
(STAM), which tightly integrate time and space, have 
been developed [6] and many domain specific STAMs 
have been developed in computer graphics and 
imaging, robotics, CAD and GIS [7][8][9]. Database 
access methods (or AMs) by definition handle out-of-
core data sets and their index resides out-of-core.  
However, TAMs, SAMs and STAMs in these other 
domains often only support in-core data sets or, more 
subtly, they may dynamically load the data but require 
that the entire index fit in-core. These restrictions are 
necessary to support rendering frame rates or robot 
planning algorithms that execute hundreds to millions 
of specialized queries (such as collision detection or 
visibility) every 16 to 100 milliseconds. 
STAMs do not yet appear in commercial or 
complete open-source DBMS’s. Further, database 
STAMs remain an active area of research. Examples 
include handling geometric objects that are highly 
mobile and streaming [10] or that contain dynamic 
topology [11]. At a recent workshop to set National 
Geographic Intelligence Agency research agenda, a 
call was made for a GIS with time structure as rich as 
the spatial structure [12]. 
In this paper, we introduce a relatively unexplored 
approach to time structuring in terms of events. We 
show that this is a general approach that is applicable 
to many types of events and data. We then describe 
how this can be merged into an urban visual analytics 
approach that includes topic modeling and entity 
extraction to extract the whole story of a place. 
 
3. Events and 4D GIS 
 
To tell the whole story of Rome, there is the further 
issue of how to automatically generate and present to 
the end-user an over-arching temporal narrative of the 
entire historical digital corpus. One way to do this is to 
develop a narrative structure based on important 
events. For this purpose, an event is defined as a 
meaningful occurrence at a particular place and time. 
Extending the idea of multiple, intertwined histories 
presented in the Introduction, a meaningful event in, 
for example, a weather history could be a great storm 
whereas one in religious history could be the building 
of a church. An intertwined history would place events 
from both these histories into the same time structure. 
These events can be extracted more or less 
automatically in multiple ways. For example, recent 
weather events can be extracted from satellite or 
Doppler radar observations [13] or from simulations 
using 3D feature extraction techniques. Thus the whole 
history of a large scale hurricane can be automatically 
set up as a series of sub-events (formation, approaching 
land, storm surge, severe wind and rainfall, etc.) that 
provide a compact signature for the whole story of the 
hurricane [14]. Other events, including weather events 
that predate modern observational methods, will be 
described in texts or picture/text combinations 
Figure 1. Automatic event identification 
and layout. 
Interactive event timelines can then be set up as shown 
in Figure 1. (In this figure, time is along the horizontal 
axis and the vertical axis is just used to separate event 
streams with different topics.) Here the events are 
extracted automatically from streaming broadcast news 
over a one month time period (August, 2006) [15]. 
Each event bubble shows all the news stories for a 
particular main event occurring at the beginning of the 
bubble with the thickness of the bubble proportional to 
the number of related news stories over time. Selection 
of a bubble at a particular point brings forth a video of 
the main news story for that event at that time. Clusters 
of bubbles indicate major stories (Israeli incursion into 
Lebanon, Fidel Castro’s illness, attempted bombing at 
Heathrow, Iranian nuclear program). The main events 
depicted were independently verified by comparing to 
the New York Times compilation for that period 
(which was done by hand).  
The techniques described in the next sections can 
be used to attach meaning to and make a history out of 
these events. Although these automatic techniques 
usually provide good event identification, the meanings 
of the events are not always clear. In these cases, a user 
can interactively attach a meaningful label or category 
to the event. Since higher level events are much more 
compact and less numerous than the mass of 
information they describe, this should be feasible for 
the end-user to do. 
Once we have the collection of events and sub-
events over time, we can organize them into a 
hierarchical tree structure; see Figure 2. (Undoubtedly 
a comprehensive structure will be more complicated 
than a tree with, for example, links between events 
across categories. However, we will use a tree as a first 
step because it captures a high order organization 
(events, sub-events, etc.) that is meaningful to the user. 
Then links between main events within or between 
trees can be made explicitly.) The question is then how 
to combine this tree structure with the spatial GIS 
structure. The incorporation is first spatial. A standard 
GIS SAM is used to divide and subdivide the surface 
of the virtual world into spatial cells, and the locations 
of the events, city boundaries, buildings, social 
activities, etc. (for an urban history) are placed in their 
respective cells. But at a certain level we now add the 
time hierarchy over the events for this spatial region. 
The appropriate level for Rome might be a spatial cell 
of, say, 20 KM on a side, centered around the Forum. 
The organization of the time structure over this spatial 
cell is in terms of events. All major events occurring in 
this cell are inserted at their appropriate places along 
the time dimension. 
To insure fast access to relevant information, we 
will maintain both the spatial and the event hierarchies. 
The events are compact, so this hierarchy will not 
require much space or overhead, while the GIS 
hierarchy will insure the most efficient access to the 
potentially much more voluminous spatial data. (The 
relative compactness is due to the fact that the events 
are a high-level abstraction of the detailed underlying 
data). With this structure one could filter by events and 
time or by spatial area. Using this structure, it would be 
quite easy to construct interactive time lines annotated 
by main events along their time range that could then 
be expanded to reveal sub-events. 
 
3.1. Detailed Spatio-Temporal Structure 
 
Figure 2 shows the high-level data organization. The 
Historical Digital Corpus is all the text, images, video, 
2D and 3D models, and GIS layers referenced by the 
software system. These may be stored in their own 
DBMS’s of varying types; in plain, flat files; or in 
domain specific AMs (such as graphics data formats). 
In the figure, the Narrative Event Hierarchy is the 
hierarchical, narrative event structure that is visually 
presented to the user. The Event STAM stores Events 
by their time period and 3D location. The Geometry 
Representation STDAM (spatio-temporal-detail access 
method) provides access to the geometric 
representations (i.e. spatially located computer 
graphics models) associated with the Historical Corpus 
elements. Scalable graphics data structures require 
level-of-detail aspects [16] which the rendering 
algorithm uses to only process a graphics object at the 
resolution required by the current viewpoint. Hence, 
the Geometry Representation AM includes this 
additional level-of-detail component.  
Access method design involves trade-offs among 
the type of queries that the method implementation will 
execute with optimal speed. The Geometry 
Representation (or G.R.) STDAM is optimized for 
performance of real-time, interactive rendering and 3D 
interaction techniques (selection, manipulation, 
collision detection, etc). At a low-level, no one 
STDAM is optimal for all types of rendered geometry. 
Geo-located information including map icons and 
glyphs, 3D meshes, volumetric data, point clouds, 2D 
video, image-based rendering, etc. all have specific 
spatial, temporal and/or detail access methods [16][17]. 
Also, many graphics AMs do not page their index or 
page their data. The G.R. STDAM itself, however, will 
page its data and its index, but its data leaf nodes will 
reference specialized graphics AMs and render code 
modules appropriate for a given node. In all cases, the 
goal is to support interactive visualization since the 
data will be so rich with unexpected relationships that 
an exploratory end-user experience is necessary. 
 
Figure 2. Data Structures and Access Methods 
 
The G.R. STDAM entries are Spatio-Temporal 
Entries (STEs) defined by a spatial extent and a time 
period. An STE also contains a reference to a paged 
coarse geometric representation, a reference to the 
detailed AM index and data set, a reference to a render 
code module, and a reference to the set of the 
generating data in the Corpus. 
STAMs have a broad design space with dozens of 
different independent dimensions [7][8][9]. One aspect 
is whether the temporal index is built above the spatial 
structure, the spatial structure is built above the 
temporal structure or the indices are interleaved. The 
Event STAM will be organized with time on top of 
space. The G.R. STDAM will be organized with space 
on top of time. However, the individual graphics AMs 
associated with a given Spatio-Temporal Entry will be 
organized in whatever way is best for the Entity’s 
geometry representation. Events in the Narrative Event 
Hierarchy will be instances of a Spatio-Temporal 
Entity. Each Event’s Spatio-Temporal Entity will be 
indexed by both the Event and the G.R. AM’s. 
Spatial subdivision in both the Event STAM and 
G.R. STDAM will use an octree. The Event STAM 
will place an interval tree [18] on top of its octree. In 
the G.R. STDAM each octree cell contains an interval 
tree. This interval tree contains a reference to every 
Spatio-Temporal Entry whose spatial extent intersects 
the octree cell and whose spatial extent just fits into a 
box the size of the cell’s parent cell.  
The rendering traversal of the STDAM would use 
HLOD methods [19][20], but when reaching an STE, 
the STE’s render module is executed and passed 
information such as the current time instant and the 
projected size in pixels of the STE’s extent. For 
efficiency, the renderer should take advantage of 
frame-to-frame coherence to avoid re-traversing the 
entire octree and the entire temporal interval tree for 
the octree nodes that pass the coarse cull and LOD 
tests. Again, the render modules for each STE would 
be highly specialized to the particular geometric 
representation of the STE. 
 
4. Topic Analysis and Entity Extraction 
     Recent methods can successfully derive meaningful 
topics from a collection of documents. These 
automated, data-driven methods analyze documents as 
a bag of words without regard to linguistic 
relationships. Although detailed higher meanings may 
be lost, the methods are quite flexible and can be used 
to derive topics from the underlying content that, under 
human analysis, are meaningful. The methods can be 
applied to documents of any type in any field. 
Combined with other automated methods, they allow 
the collection of documents to “tell the observer what 
they are about” including how the individual 
documents cluster into related groups and the nature of 
their relationships. Indeed, these methods can be 
applied to different languages; all that is needed is an 
appropriate dictionary. A recent New York Times 
article demonstrated how this topic modeling approach 
can be successfully applied to the trends in topics in 
the complete collection of stories reported in a 
Southern newspaper during the Civil War, revealing 
trends over time and in response to key events that 
would be quite hard to discover otherwise [21]. 
An approach that we have used successfully to 
analyze NSF proposals over time and also do full text 
analysis of relevant papers [1] is based on a Bayesian 
approach [22] that automatically learns a set of topics 
for a document collection in terms of a set of key 
words and then assigns appropriate topics to each 
document in the collection. The Stanford Modeling 
Toolbox [23] makes such tools available. These 
approaches can be applied to full-text documents 
(papers, essays, reports, books--including works of 
fiction), although long documents such as books will 
need to be split via chapters, etc. 
Figure 3 shows the topics derived from a collection 
of NSF proposals using this approach [1]. In this case, 
20 topics were automatically extracted from the 
proposal collection. The topics are vertical lines in the 
top part of the figure; each individual proposal is a 
 
Figure 3. Topics from text collection and 
ThemeRiver timeline. 
horizontal graph plotted showing its proportion for 
each topic. The topics, some of which are labeled, well 
describe the themes of the NSF directorate examined 
(IIS in this case). The bottom of the figure is a 
themeriver where each colored band shows the ebb and 
flow of particular topics over time.  
Coupled with this, we need the means to extract 
entities indicating time, location, actors (people or 
groups), and references (e.g., building names, 
neighborhood names, etc.) for each document section 
related to given topics. Many techniques exist for this 
sort of geo-temporal analysis. Among the most 
powerful of these tools are those built around 
FactXtractor [24], developed at Penn State. With 
appropriate geo-cross-referencing, these topics can be 
used to help form the events described in the last 
section. A collection of interactions permit one to filter 
by topic, time period, related proposal, and other ways. 
But how do we convert collections of events into 
histories, and how do we make these histories rich and 
complete? We do not have to start these from scratch; 
there is a lot of information already organized and 
available. A compact historical synthesis of the best 
scholarship, such as Michael Grant’s history of antique 
Rome [25], or a more recent historical atlas, will 
provide a rich timeline of main events and sub-events. 
These can be extracted and then relevant parts of the 
book and of other books can be analyzed with topic 
modeling and entity extraction for additional topics, 
related events, and for relations among topics. The 
initial, high level event extraction could be done 
manually or semi-manually in support of good 
meaning; the main events would be straightforward to 
find and might even be listed in the book (or in chapter 
headings). Even if incomplete in terms of “main 
events”, this initial timeline would be filled in by the 
topic modeling and event extraction step upon further 
analysis of the historical text collection. 
One can do the same thing for other histories, 
finding leading books or other historical overviews that 
contain syntheses for social history, ecclesiastical 
history, architectural history, and so on. The idea is to 
build a series of “scaffoldings” containing the events 
for each of these histories. Once we have this initial 
structure, we can cast our net wider to other books and 
documents, using the initial collection as a “training 
set” for this broader collection so that we can enrich 
existing topics and events and find new ones. 
Ultimately, one wants to consider this set of 
scaffoldings together, seeing how they intertwine and 
affect each other. Of course, just seeing events from 
different histories that are close together in time and 
location, perhaps having correlated trends over time, 
may be enough to infer a relationship, including a 
possible cause and effect relationship. These events 
can then be explored more deeply. In addition, it would 
be very useful if the topic modeling could 
automatically reveal potential relationships in more 
detail and combine main events from different histories 
into a comprehensive history. 
Relative importance of events across histories can 
be assessed by looking at their text collections to see 
which events are mentioned in more than one 
collection. Moreover, if topics or parts of topics 
associated with an event appear across histories, it is a 
further indication of the event’s importance. In this 
way a comprehensive hierarchy of events across 
histories could be built. 
In fact, we have already developed a process 
similar to the one proposed here, although in a much 
more limited form, in our project to study the impact of 
NSF programs and the proposals they fund [1]. Here 
we need to follow programs that cover particular 
research areas over time (e.g., databases or 
visualization in computer science) but the names and to 
some extent the focus of the programs change. We 
surmount this problem by tracking the underlying 
science as expressed in research papers published, 
because fields such as databases or visualization have 
permanence over time and evolve slowly. For each 
field (e.g. visualization) we determine the main 
journals and conferences and then apply topic 
modeling to the papers (over time) from this collection. 
We can thus find main topics and trends over time. 
Topics that appear across disciplines are cross-
disciplinary as are proposals that have multiple salient 
topics. This approach can also infer the impact of a 
particular program on the underlying science. (We can 
see how a research area evolves after a particular 
funding program is begun.) It can also show what 
research areas a program is actually funding (through 
topic analysis of the proposals funded and comparison 
to the topic analyses for the research fields), which 
may be somewhat different from what the program 
says it’s funding. We have applied this approach to 
visual analytics and have found trends over time and 
the effects of individual funding programs. 
 
5. Image/Map Analytics 
 
As described further in the next section, huge 
amounts of imagery associated with Rome are 
available. More recently, this has been photographic 
imagery and other media, but in the antique and 
especially the papal periods, this imagery was 
drawings, paintings, and prints. A lot of work has been 
done on image semantics that lead to image 
understanding. In this approach, instead of low-level 
image processing, semantics of imagery are determined 
for higher level image understanding (e.g., whether 
they depict beach scenes, urban scenes, scenes with 
people pursuing certain activities, traffic scenes, scenes 
with flowers, types of animals, etc.). These techniques 
are robust (i.e., they can recognize beach or traffic 
scenes even under conditions of different lighting, 
viewpoint, or activity), and new topics for automated 
understanding can even be user-created by selecting 
sets of training images for the desired topics. Further, 
the image understanding algorithms coupled with user 
interaction can very efficiently remove junk images 
and provide high quality tagging. These methods have 
been applied to image collections such as Flickr. 
For the intertwined histories described here, these 
methods would need to be extended to analysis of 
drawings, paintings, and prints. Some work has been 
done with drawings--especially map drawing 
understanding, which will be of substantial use here 
[27]. This map content can be associated with 
geographic views of relevant events. In addition, there 
are new methods that successfully consider image and 
text content together [28]. These methods will permit 
automatic derivation of much more meaningful 
descriptions for images (e.g., from captions or closely 
associated text). Accurate analysis of drawings, 
paintings, and prints will depend on the legibility of the 
original and will be affected by the artist’s style. 
However, interactive visualization of the clustered 
images after automated analysis can quite efficiently 
clarify miss-assignments and miss-groupings. 
Finally, we need methods to automatically extract 
architecture from perspective (or birds-eye) views of 
Rome and its neighborhoods painted or captured at 
different times in its history. The Vatican museum 
alone has thousands of such images. Debevec et al [29] 
developed a semi-automated system for modeling and 
rendering architecture from photographs. Myriads of 
later methods were developed which further automate 
the creation of high detailed 3D models from both 
historical photos and paintings. El-Hakim et al [3] 
demonstrate the applications of a range of techniques 
for combining both photos and paintings to generate 
3D models of historical structures. More recently 
Schindler et al. [30] combined automated 3D 
reconstruction with a historical probabilistic model 
than can ingest a set of historical photographs of a 
cityscape with partially known dates and then construct 
3D models of buildings to determine the most plausible 
temporal ordering of the original photographs. With 
these methods and the event structuring described 
above, an urban visual analytics system can be built. 
 
6. Focus on Rome 
 
Rome has been as a city for 2,500 years, and has 
been the center of three distinct social orders: Antique 
Rome, spanning the period from the republic to the 
largest empire of the ancient world, Papal Rome, the 
seat of ecclesiastical and secular power during the 
renaissance and baroque eras, and Modern Capital, 
Rome as the center of the Italian state. It is this 
layering of culture, art, urban form and architecture 
that forms much of the character of the city. 
     The kinds of information that are available from 
each era vary with the interest in the culture of the era, 
how well records are preserved, and, in the case of 
Rome in particular, interpretations by one era toward 
its predecessor. All of these factors make the 
application of this visual analytic approach particularly 
fruitful for Rome, given the need to understand an 
almost bewildering variety of records and ideas. 
Indeed, much of the scholarship that centers on Rome 
proceeds by ignoring layered complexity and instead 
focusing on one particular time period or type of 
record. For example, experts will be able to examine 
the political and economic motives and consequences 
of papal correspondence from the 16th century, but will 
not have tools to understand this together with other 
information about Rome during the same period.  
     With the applications of visual analytic techniques 
described here, scholars who embrace the idea of 
“digital humanities” will be able to understand and 
compare information from disparate sources, 
potentially finding previously hidden relationships 
between economics and aesthetics, between 
transportation systems and theology, between 
geography and urban form. The shift in tone and 
structure of the 16th century papal correspondences 
may be linked in meaningful ways to economic, social, 
geographic and technical issues that have been 
previously impossible to understand. 
      We have identified three data sources for each 
period that illustrate the range of data types and at the 
same time contrast the information that may be 
available from other periods. For Antique Rome, we 
pursue mytho-poetic history as presented by leading 
authors of roman history, the catalog of inscriptions on 
public buildings, and the archeological record of 
building type and locations. For Papal Rome, we 
pursue the bureaucracy of an ideology as preserved in 
the Vatican written records, a catalog of renaissance 
painting animated by newfound interest in an accurate 
representation of nature, and the building record of 
new projects aimed at restoring Rome as a capital. For 
the Modern Capital, we pursue GIS for the city of 
Rome and Lazio, the National Institute of Statistics for 
census data and Flickr images geo tagged to Rome. 
  
6.1. Antique 
 
Although the number of primary sources 
documenting the history of any city from antiquity is 
dwarfed by historical records of more recent periods, 
Rome offers us an exception for several reasons. As 
the seat of a military and economic entity that 
dominated Western civilization for over 500 years, 
Rome offered its historians a unique wealth of both 
patronage and primary sources. Even at the dawn of 
this Imperial period, the city had already accumulated 
five centuries of legislative, bureaucratic and literary 
documents. As a city that at its peak numbered a 
million inhabitants, more than 20 times the size of any 
Western city before it, the range and depth of recorded 
human activity is unparalleled in the ancient world. 
And as self-conscious inheritor of the classical 
traditions of Hellenic culture, the Imperial city fostered 
archives and a culture of scholarship that assembled a 
sweeping record of all antiquity. Sources include the 
histories of Livy, Plutarch, Sallust, Suetonius and 
Tacitus, the correspondence of Cicero, Seneca and 
Varro, the treatises of Pliny, Vitruvius and Frontinus, 
and the musings of Virgil, Ovid, and Horace. Although 
most of these histories are more mytho-poetic than 
scholarly, these texts, and those they have spawned 
throughout subsequent centuries, form a uniquely 
influential contribution to Western culture.  
As a more durable corollary to the relatively 
ephemeral texts inked on papyrus and parchment, the 
extensive collection of inscriptions on buildings 
(Figure 4), monuments and tombs both public and 
private throughout Rome’s Republican and Imperial 
periods is unequaled in the ancient world. In addition 
to the extant remains, subsequent catalogs from the 
Papal period provide us with a uniquely detailed record 
of primary sources that range from the august (official 
dedications and bureaucratic minutiae) to the 
perfunctory and illicit (graffiti and political 
sloganeering). As with the more traditional literary 
forms that survive, ancient Rome provides for nearly 
two millennia of secondary and tertiary sources 
contingent upon its wealth of these primary materials. 
 
Figure 4. Inscription, Arch of Titus. Rome. 
 
Rome provides an incomparably rich and layered 
archeological record, from the early Iron Age 
settlements excavated atop the Palatine Hill to the late 
Antique remains of a metropolis in transition, there are 
few, if any, cities that rival Rome for both the range of 
archeological artifacts, and the depth and scope of 
scholarly discourse. Materials yielded from the 
archeological record of Rome are both image and text-
based in nature, and have been extensively published 
and discussed via the broad array of scholarly journals 
published throughout the past one hundred years. This 
record includes current and ongoing activity across the 
historic city center and its environs. 
In addition, of course, there is a wealth of post-
antique texts that describe political, social, urban, 
military, and economic life during this period. These 
texts refer to and organize antique sources. Our system 
will ingest these texts to provide the backbone of an 
integrated history of this era. 
 
6.2. Papal 
 
As Rome transitioned from the temporal to the 
ecclesiastical center of the Western world, it continued 
its status as an administrative center of unique breadth 
and reach. As such, even with the fall of its imperial 
status, it upheld its capacity for recording and 
archiving a broad range of human activities, both 
sacred and profane, throughout some of the most 
turbulent events in Western history. The libraries 
within Rome itself contain a bureaucratic record of 
almost two thousand years, in its capacity as the seat of 
Catholicism. Extant written records are contained in 
the Vatican library, and historical collections elsewhere 
in the city (the Biblioteche Angelica, Casanatense, 
Hertziana, and Vallicelliana, to name a few). In 
addition to the singularity of its ecclesiastical holdings, 
the extent of library collections of literature, 
philosophy, history, and the natural sciences is rivaled 
by few cities in the West. 
Arguably the greatest patron of the arts throughout 
Western civilization, the Church has embellished the 
city of Rome with an inimitable wealth of artistic 
production. There are extensive collection of works 
that depict the city, in whole or in part, in ways that are 
sufficiently naturalistic to aid in the reconstruction of 
the city. The diversity of works and subjects, from the 
early drawings of Duperac and Palladio, through the 
paintings of Pannini and van Wittel, the etchings of 
Vasi and Piranesi, and the maps by Bufalini and Nolli 
(Figure 5) provide us a broad spectrum of pictorial 
sources that document the city throughout this period. 
Collections include the Vatican and Capitoline 
Museums, the Barberini, Borghese, Colonna, Corsini, 
Doria-Pamphili and Spada Galleries, as well as smaller 
collections both public and private throughout the city. 
Images originally made in the city are also contained in 
collections elsewhere in the world. 
 
Figure 5. Letaroulilly’s Plan of the 
Campodoglio, 1840. 
 
As with the ancient city, the built environment of 
the Papal city is both unique and ubiquitous throughout 
the historic center of Rome and its environs. As the 
‘headquarters’ of Catholicism, the city is endowed with 
an unrivalled diversity of sacred architecture spanning 
almost two millennia, from the earliest Christian 
catacombs to the ongoing construction of 
contemporary churches designed by internationally 
acclaimed architects. Additionally, the city features a 
unique diversity of building types sponsored by the 
broad range of ecclesiastical, diplomatic and charitable 
institutions overseen directly or indirectly throughout 
the history of the Roman Curia. Particularly in the 
wake of the Counter-Reformation, religious orders 
(particularly the Jesuits) and related social institutions 
provided the city a unique mix of ‘ecclesiastical 
infrastructure’ seen nowhere else. Detailed records of 
changes in ownership and occupation of buildings in 
the historic center of Rome in both Papal and Civic 
archives have the potential to yield significant analytic 
insights into the development and transformation of the 
city’s inventory of historic structures.  
 
6.3. Modern 
 
The contemporary history of Rome is in most ways 
typical to that of other cities of economically 
developed countries. One of the most interesting 
aspects of studying Rome is the ability to intersect 
modern technologies and data sources with the past. 
Like all modern cities, Rome is awash with sources 
of data. We will focus on three sources that typify the 
much larger set of data available. One underlying 
similarity of all three is the use of spatial location, a 
result of both a technological basis and the 
development of modern cartography. 
 The Sistemi Informativi Territoriali (SIT) is the 
name for the Italian Geographic Information System. 
Information for Rome and the Italian government are 
available at a publically accessible web site [31]. This 
is generally supported using ArcGIS or compatible 
software, with the limits on data display and 
interactivity inherent in that system. While huge 
amounts of data are available and are all are geo 
referenced, there is no established methods of 
correlating data that are not commensurable. One of 
the goals of this project will be to find ways to develop 
meaningful connections with other forms of data and, 
more importantly, to register these data with 
information over the whole history of Rome. 
Some work has already been attempted in Rome 
using GIS both for the identification of historic sites 
and with overlay of historical maps [32]. Our system 
will provide a comprehensive framework for these 
fragmentary attempts. 
The Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (Istat) is the 
Italian National Statistical Institute, which since 1926 
has conducted the census. The census is conducted 
every ten years; the last complete census was 2001. 
Complete statistics are available on-line [33], including 
demographic, economic and social information at the 
census block level. 
The proliferation of images is a hallmark of 
contemporary life. The painstaking and rare paintings 
and frescoes of the papal era have been replaced by a 
flood of images. As Paul Virilio noted, as a result of 
“…the industrial proliferation of visual and audiovisual 
prostheses…we are looking at the rapid collapse of 
mnemonic consolidation” [34]. 
An extreme form of this is on-line image sites, such 
as Flickr, which contain billions of images. A more 
recent trend is using geo tags for images, which leads 
to an archive that is specifically tied to Rome. A recent 
check shows almost 500,000 such images (Figure 6). 
Some tools, such as Google’s Picasa, have taken initial 
steps toward embedding images tied to events within 
virtual spatial models. The interests of tourism skew 
this record of images, but they form a powerful 
resource of current and modestly historical desire. 
 
Figure 6. Flickr with 480K geotagged 
photographs. 
 
7. Putting It All Together 
 
Once the system described here is put together, what 
could be achieved? Integrated time lines of main 
events will not be hard to construct by hand; entity 
extraction with at first a well-chosen set of sources can 
then fill in details about these events and also 
relationships between them. The event timeline in 
Figure 3 and the annotated Topic river in Figure 1 
would be linked to a geographic view. As events for a 
topic are selected, the geographic view would reveal 
the location and spread for that event/topic. 
Conversely, a region of the city could be selected and 
only events/topics for that region displayed.  
Imagine an historian studying the Counter 
Reformation. Normally, she would primarily study the 
chronology of events presented from one or two 
archival sources, keeping in mind the political, 
economic, architectural and geological histories. This 
system would allow her to explore these intertwined 
histories interactively, linking event histories together, 
seeing which events fall together in sequence, and 
uncovering relationships both spatially and topically. 
Imagine an architect studying one particular 
location in a city, but being able to see not just the 
current form of the urban context, but also all the 
underlying events that co-locate on the site. This could 
include the accumulation of structures and 
neighborhoods (extracted from city views rendered at 
different times) that rose and fell alongside the main 
buildings, how the city built up in layers over time, and 
even how particular buildings (such as the Pantheon) 
changed over time in appearance and function. The 
history of geological events such as flooding, the 
economic history of the site, the demographic history 
of the site can all be examined simultaneously. What 
will this record reveal about the uses of certain 
locations or neighborhoods now versus Renaissance or 
Imperial times, including the subtle ebb and flow of 
uses? There are architects who know small parts of a 
city in this manner, but it is an unusual and uneven 
knowledge. Urban visual analytics will provide access 
to the full wealth of information. 
Imagine following the demographic history of 
Rome over its history, rising to a city of a million 
inhabitants in Imperial times and falling to a few 
thousand residents, living in an outdoor museum 
during the Middle Ages, and then recovering its 
grandeur and its population during the Renaissance and 
expanding into Modern times. Intertwined histories 
will reveal how these demographics affected and were 
affected the social and political history of Rome. 
Of course, we need digitized records in order to 
apply our automated methods. Many contemporary 
records are digitized. In addition, the Vatican Library 
has undertaken the digitization of 80,000 of its historic 
manuscripts (with images and illustrations) and will 
place the archive on the Web. Large portions of 
painting collections are also digitized. Secondary and 
tertiary sources (e.g., texts from journals and recent 
books) are also digitized. A related question is whether 
the texts are scanned or have detailed word 
recognition. A lot of the available older manuscripts 
are probably scanned, so a character recognition step 
would have to be applied (with quality of recognition 
dependent on the quality of the original imprint). 
Fortunately there is a wealth of English texts in 
archives around Rome; Rome has been a focus of 
English-speaking scholars for centuries. Although our 
automated methods could be used on other languages 
with a dictionary providing keyword and caption 
translations, it is certainly easier and richer to have 
English texts. We conclude that although the record is 
not complete, there is plenty of digital information to 
find events, do event structuring and topic modeling, 
and analyze collections of images. 
 
8. Conclusion and Next Steps 
 
In conclusion, we have described a system of 
automated and semi-automated methods that can be 
brought together to create the complete story of a 
place. We and others have shown how particular 
methods can successfully produce results that fit into 
the overall story. Bringing them together in the 
integrated approach described here will undoubtedly 
yield discoveries and new knowledge, possible 
examples of which are described in the last section. 
Interactive visualization plays a key role both in 
providing meaning to retrieved events and topics and 
in uncovering trends, relationships, and patterns that 
would be hard or impossible to see otherwise. 
Our plan is to begin constructing main events and 
event histories for political, religious, urban (including 
architectural), and military Rome. We will also add 
historical details about main people movements, 
plagues, and population demographics. We will then 
begin generating appropriate topics for these histories.  
 
9. References  
[1] Wenwen Dou, Remco Chang, Xiaoyu Wang, and William 
Ribarsky. ParallelTopics: A Probabilistic Approach to 
Exploring Document Collections. Accepted for 
publication, IEEE VAST 2011. 
[2] J. Fan, W. Ribarsky, R. Jain, ``Social computing for 
collaborative image understanding", Invited Paper, IEEE 
Multimedia, vol. 18, 2011. 
[3] El-Hakim, S.F., J.-F.c. Lapointe, ois, and E. Whiting. 
Digital reconstruction and 4D presentation through time. 
in ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 talks. 2008. New York, NY, 
USA: ACM. 
[4] Snodgrass, R. T. (1999), Developing Time-Oriented 
Database Applications in SQL, Morgan Kaufmann. 
[5] Kothuri, R. K. V.; Ravada, S. & Abugov, D. (2002), 
Quadtree and R-tree indexes in oracle spatial: a 
comparison using GIS data, Proc, ACM SIGMOD 2002, 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 546--557. 
[6] Theodoridis, Y., et al. Specifications for efficient 
indexing in spatiotemporal databases. in Scientific and 
Statistical Database Management. Proc. Tenth 
International Conference on. 1998. 
[7] Rigaux, P., M. Scholl, and A. Voisard, Spatial databases 
with application to GIS. 2002, San Francisco, CA, USA: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 
[8] Goodchild, M.F., M. Yuan, and T.J. Cova, Towards a 
general theory of geographic representation in GIS. Int. J. 
Geogr. Inf. Sci., 2007. 21: p. 239-260. 
[9] Samet, H. Sorting in space: multidimensional, spatial, and 
metric data structures for computer graphics applications. 
ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA 2010 Courses. New York, NY. 
[10] Mokbel, M.F. and W.G. Aref, SOLE: scalable on-line 
execution of continuous queries on spatio-temporal data 
streams. The VLDB Journal, 2008. 17: p. 971-995. 
[11] Jiang, J. and M. Worboys, Event-based topology for 
dynamic planar areal objects. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., 
2009. 23: p. 33-60. 
[12] National Academy of Sciences Workshop. New 
Research Directions for the National Geospatial 
Intelligence Agency (May, 2010, Washington, DC). 
[13] yue Jiang, T., et al. Acquisition and Display of Real-
Time Atmospheric Data on Terrain. EG/IEEE EuroVis 
2001: Springer-Verlag, New York. 
[14] Li Yu, Aidong Lu, William Ribarsky, and Wei Chen. 
Digital Storytelling: Automatic Animation for Time-
Varying Data Visualization. Computer Graphics Forum, 
Vo. 29 (7) pp. 2271-2280 (2010). 
[15] D. Luo, J. Yang, M. Krstajic, J. Fan, W. Ribarsky, and 
D. Keim. EventRiver: Interactive visual exploration of 
constantly evolving text collections. IEEE Trans. On 
Visualization and Computer Graphics (2011). 
[16] Luebke, D., et al., Level of Detail for 3D Graphics. 
2002, New York, NY, USA: Elsevier Science Inc. 
[17] Akenine-Möller, T., and Haines, E. Real-time 
Rendering, A.K. Peters, Natick MA, 2002. 
[18] Edelsbrunner, H., Dynamic Data Structures for 
Orthogonal Intersection Queries. 1980, Inst. 
Informationsverarb., Tech. Univ. Graz, Graz, Austria. 
[19] Erikson, C., D. Manocha, and I. William V. Baxter. 
HLODs for faster display of large static and dynamic 
environments. in I3D '01: Proc. of the 2001 symposium 
on Interactive 3D graphics. New York, NY, USA: 
ACM. 
[20] Yoon, S.-E., B. Salomon, and R. Gayle, Quick-VDR: 
Out-of-Core View-Dependent Rendering of Gigantic 
Models. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, 2005. 11(4): p. 369-382. 
[21] Robert K. Nelson. Of Monsters, Men—And Topic 
Modeling. New York Times (May 29, 2011). 
[22] D. Blei, A. Ng, and M. Jordan. Latent Dirichlet 
allocation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
3:993–1022, 2003. 
[23] Stanford Topic Modeling Toolbox. 
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tmt/tmt-0.3/ 
[24] Pan, Chi-Chun, Jaiswal, Anuj R., Luo, Junyan, 
Robinson, Anthony A., Mitra, Prasenjit A., 
MacEachren, Alan M., Turton, Ian A., TexPlorer: An 
application supporting text analysis, IEEE VAST 2007 
pp. 205-6. 
[25] Grant, Michael, History of Rome, Prentice Hall, New 
Jersey, 1978. 
[26] T. Shaw and P. Bajcsy, “Automated Image Processing 
of Historical Maps”, SPIE (7869), pp. 7869-9 , 2011. 
[27] H. Samet and A. Soffer, “A Legend-Driven Geographic 
Symbol Recognition System”, ICPR94, pp. 350-55 
(1994). 
[28] H. Luo, J. Fan, Y. Zhou, ``Multimedia news exploration 
and retrieval by integrating keywords, relations and 
visual features", Multimedia Tools and Applications, 
vol.51, pp.625-648, 2011. 
[29] Debevec, P.E., C.J. Taylor, and J. Malik. Modeling and 
rendering architecture from photographs: a hybrid 
geometry- and image-based approach. Proc. ACM 
SIGGRAPH ’96. New York, NY, USA: ACM. 
[30] Schindler, G. and F. Dellaert. Probabilistic temporal 
inference on reconstructed 3D scenes. IEEE CVPR, 
2010. 
[31] “Italy-Nationwide Data,” Geo Community, accessed 
6/9/11, 
http://data.geocomm.com/catalog/IT/datalist.html 
[32] K. Lelo and M. Travaglini, The GIS-based historical 
atlas of Rome, presented at the XXth International CIPA 
Symposium, 26 Sept.–1 Oct. 2005, Torino, Italy. 
[33]  “Databases and information systems,” Istat, accessed 
6/9/11, http://en.istat.it/dati/db_siti/. 
[34] Virilio, Paul, The Vision Machine. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1994. 

