Poster:Visual Analysis of Stream Texts with Keywords Significance
Jamal Alsakran
Kent State University
Ye Zhao?
Kent State University
Dongning Luo
University of North Carolina - Charlotte
Jing Yang†
University of North Carolina - Charlotte
ABSTRACT
Stream text collections demand a thorough sophisticated method to
explore the massive data and effectively extract valuable informa-
tion. We propose a force-directed method to dynamically visualize
stream text documents. The method captures events as they occur,
injects them into the system, and clusters them on-the-fly. Typ-
ically, keywords are used to calculate similarity and accordingly
steer the clustering results, we propose keywords significance to
magnify the importance of certain keywords on-the-go. The user
can interactively manipulate the significance of keywords and see
the impact on the system. A real dataset example is provided to
show the effectiveness of our method.
1 INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a method to dynamically visualize con-
stantly evolving texts. Our approach employs force-directed place-
ment to resemble documents visualization to vertices and forces
between them. Physically, the method models the potential field
between vertices and presents forces that tend to group similar
documents, and move dissimilar ones apart. The method receives
streaming text documents such as news or emails and visualizes
them in a 2D plot. The visual result shows documents grouped in
related topics and placed in relative view among all other docu-
ments.
Documents are represented as vectors of keywords. Keywords
are special words that qualify to be representatives of the whole
documents. Typically, similarity between documents is calculated
using keywords. When a document emerges and keywords are ex-
tracted, its similarity stays still over time. In our approach, we pro-
pose keywords significance to provide dynamical system furnished
with the capability to adjust the similarity as the system is running.
A keyword significance present the importance of that keywords at
a certain time. Intuitively, keywords with higher significance are
highlighted by increasingly attracting more of the documents that
have those keywords. To sustain interactivity, keywords signifi-
cance can be adjusted based on the users preference or can auto-
matically extracted from the hot topics.
Stream text visualization has recently received a great attention.
ThemeRiver [4] depicts the strength changes of individual key-
words as currents within a river flowing a long time axis. Narratives
[3] uses a temporal axis to visualize ways that concepts (keywords)
have changed over time in weblog archives. Force directed place-
ment has been employed in InfoSky [1] to enable users to explore
large, hierarchically structured document collections. Chalmers et
al. [2] propose a prototype to explore word-based information us-
ing the physical behavior of the containing particles.
2 OUR APPROACH
Our system receives constantly evolving text documents, groups
them into clusters, and places them in a 2D plot based on their
similarities, i.e. similar documents are drawn relatively close to
?e-mail: {jalsakra, zhao}@cs.kent.edu
†e-mail:{dluo2,Jing.Yang}@uncc.edu
each other and far from dissimilar ones. A text document is rep-
resented as a vector of keywords. Initially, the system captures re-
cently occurred events, computes the similarity between every pair
of documents, and place them randomly in a 2D plot. The pairwise
similarity is mapped into a distance in our domain to determine the
optimal distance between the documents. Iteratively, the documents
start moving closer or farther until they approximately reach opti-
mal distances. When a new document reaches, the system injects it
randomly and continues the process. Specifically, the (documents)
vertices will exert attractive and repulsive forces on each other, the
forces cause the vertices to move closer or farther. At each step, the
attractive and repulsive forces are calculated Eq. 1, then they are ap-
plied on the vertices to group them or fan them out. Subsequently,
the total energy of the system is computed. The process continues
until the total energy reaches a preset minimum threshold.
Fi j = (|pi ? p j|? li j)2 (1)
where pi ? p j is the spatial distance between di and d j , respec-
tively. li j is the optimal distance that is mapped from the similarity
between di and d j .
Usually, keywords are vital words that highly occur in the docu-
ment, they represent a brief summary that conveys the topic of the
document. Similarity is typically calculated from the keywords, e.g.
cosine similarity. When a document enters the system, its similarity
with other documents is calculated and stays fixed throughout the
system. However, keywords that make up the similarity can have
different importance and therefore participate variously. For ex-
ample, cosine similarity uses weights to represent keywords impor-
tance. We propose a feature called Keyword Significance to provide
the capability of altering keywords importance as the system runs.
A keyword Significance retains the importance of a keyword at a
certain time. Interactively, keywords significance can be modified
to achieve better clustering result and explore different trends of
the data. To assign keywords significance, the system investigates
the data to extract vital keywords that occur the most in the data
and raise their similarity. Alternative, a user can manipulate the
significance of specific keywords of his interest to widely explore
the documents contain those keywords, and to adjust the clustering
results.
3 EXAMPLE
Figure 1 shows an example of applying our method to dynamically
visualize text documents. The dataset represents CNN news over
one day Aug. 1, 2006, it contains 178 documents, and 19 key-
words. Figure 1(a) shows the system with 80 documents, it displays
how similar documents come together and settle adjacent to each
other while they keep relative distance form dissimilar ones. The
dataset contains 19 keywords, we run some statistics on the key-
words and decided to investigate 3 keywords which occur the most
in the dataset, namely Mel Gibson, Fidel Castro, and In Mexico. In
figure 1(a) we use different colors to highlight the documents that
contain those keywords. Blue vertices represent documents that
have none of the 3 keywords. As of figure 1(a) we don’t employ
keywords significance, and that is achieved by setting keywords sig-
nificance equally to 1. Figure 1(b) shows a late stage of the system
after all documents have been entered. To show the impact of key-
words significance we assign higher significance to Mel Gibson and
a. 80 Documents b. 178 Documents
c. 105 Documents d. 143 Documents e. 159 Documents f. 178 Documents g. 178 Documents h. 178 Documents
Figure 1: A dataset contains 178 documents, and 19 keywords. The figures show different snap shots of the system
Fidel Castro, and set it to 10. As figure 1(b) shows, including the
significance effects the clustering results by increasingly attracting
more of the documents that contain the keywords of interest. More-
over, users can explore a wider perspective of that data by manipu-
lating significance. For example, increasing the significance of Mel
Gibson causes all the documents that contain it (yellow vertices) to
be attracted, similarly, increasing the significance of Fidel Castro
groups further all the documents that have it (green and purple ver-
tices), those documents were previously spread out. The documents
that share both of the keywords (red and black vertices) are placed
somewhere in the middle between the two groups.
Figures 1 (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) present different snap shots
of the system ( See a video in the supplementary material). Figure
1(c) shows the system with 105 documents, we a little bit increase
Mel Gibson significance to 5, clearly, all the documents that have
the keyword Mel Gibson (yellow, red, and black vertices) become
closer to each other. In figure 1(d), we increase Mel Gibson signif-
icance further to 10, as we can see, yellow, red, and black vertices
come even closer and form a group. On the other hand, other doc-
uments that don’t contain Mel Gibson are not effected. Similarly,
figure 1(e) shows the clustering results of 159 documents and Fidel
Castro significance set to 10. In this figure, all the documents that
have Fidel Castro (green, purple, red, and black vertices) are gath-
ered to a group. To further explore the dataset, we set Fidel Castro
and In Mexico significance to 10 in figure 1(f), as we expect, the
documents that have either Fidel Castro or In Mexico (purple ver-
tices and cyan vertices, respectively) are forming separate groups,
while the documents that share both (green, red, and black vertices)
are collectively grouped in between to reflect that they belong to
both. Figure 1(g) displays the results of 178 documents with Mel
Gibson, Fidel Castro, and In Mexico significance set to 10, obvi-
ously, the documents that have merely one of those keywords are
forming distinguished clusters, also the documents that share more
than a keyword are placed relatively in between, for instance, black
vertices are placed in the middle of the three clusters since they
have all of them, while green vertices are positioned between Fi-
del Castro and In Mexico clusetrs. Finally, figure 1(h) shows with
no significance employed how the documents are grouped based on
their explicit similarity.
4 CONCLUSION
We present a method to dynamically visualize stream texts. The
system places the documents in a 2D plot based on their similar-
ity. In addition, we propose keywords significance to dynamically
assign importance to keywords. Effectively, keywords significance
allows the users to track certain keywords upon their preferences
by changing the configuration of the system The computational de-
mand of force-directed placement encourages us to seek out faster
method to integrate the system at each step. We also plan on devel-
oping an automatic way to extract the significance of the keywords
based on the status of the system.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Andrews, W. Kienreich, V. Sabol, J. Becker, G. Droschl, F. Kappe,
M. Granitzer, P. Auer, and K. Tochtermann. The infosky visual ex-
plorer: Exploiting hierarchical structure and document similarities. In-
formation Visualization, 8(3):166–181, Dec. 2002.
[2] M. Chalmers and P. Chiston. Bead: Explorations in information vi-
sualization. In Proceedings of the 15th annual international ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval,
pages 330–337, 1992.
[3] D. Fisher, A. Hoff, G. Robertson, and M. Hurst. Narratives: A visual-
ization to track narrative events as they develop. In IEEE Symposium
on In Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 115–122, 2008.
[4] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualiz-
ing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, Jan. 2002.

