Finding Business Information by Visualizing Enterprise 
Document Activity
Xiaoyu Wang 
UNC Charlotte, USA 
xwang25@uncc.edu 
 
Bill Janssen 
Palo Alto Research Center, USA 
jassen@parc.com
Eric Bier 
Palo Alto Research Center, USA 
eric@parc.com 
ABSTRACT 
In an enterprise environment, business information, such as 
project proposals and product discussions, is dynamic and often 
embedded in documents and document activities (e.g, emails, 
Web pages and office documents). Because this information is 
essential to business processes, corporate employees need an 
effective means to retrieve it. Some commercial products, 
including Google Desktop, provide keyword searches for finding 
some of this information. However, this approach is not always 
effective as successful keyword searches can be difficult to 
construct, and even the best queries may fail to find some 
important materials. In this paper, we present Taste (Temporal 
Activities and Story TElling), an interactive visual analytics 
system that enhances the enterprise employee’s capabilities in 
searching and sharing diverse and dynamic business information. 
Taste was designed, after interviews with corporate employees, to 
follow their information retrieval cues and help them manage, 
review and share the business information embedded in their 
document activities. Results of our lab and field studies validate 
that Taste provides employees the confidence and necessary 
features to more efficiently and effectively retrieve business 
information from their documents and activities. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H5.2 [User Interface]: Graphical user interfaces (GUI)  
Keywords 
Temporal information visualization, personal information 
management, document management, collaboration. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the enterprise environment, employees’ document activities 
result in the creation of many information streams, including 
email threads, calendar entries, Web browsing histories, and 
versions of office documents. Many of these documents contain 
information essential to the operation of the business, such as 
project proposals and emails capturing product discussions. Thus, 
it is crucial for enterprise employees to have an effective means to 
manage these information streams and retrieve desired business 
information from them. 
However, due to the dynamic and diverse nature of document 
activities, finding the desired information can be an exhausting 
task. Recent reports from Interactive Data Corp. (IDC) show that 
employees typically spend 3.7 hours per week searching but not 
finding information, and 2.5 hours per week recreating content 
that couldn’t be found [8]. 
One challenge in finding such information is coping with its 
diversity.  Finding desired information may require using different 
tools or looking in different places as a result of the different 
behaviors and conventions of the many desktop applications, such 
as individual office document suites and email clients. This 
challenge becomes even more pronounced in projects that take 
place over long periods of time or that involve many people; both 
of these factors tend to increase the amount of information to be 
managed and the number of places in which the information is 
stored. It is observed that the complexity of finding such essential 
information can result in reduced productivity in an enterprise 
environment [8]. Therefore, there appears to be an urgent need for 
an information management system that can facilitate information 
search and retrieval in the enterprise environment.   
Some commercial products, such as Google Desktop [7] and 
Apple Spotlight [1] have built-in document indexing that enable 
users to search for information with keywords. However, keyword 
search can be difficult and is often insufficient in an enterprise 
environment [19]. For example, if one can’t remember the name 
of a document or can’t think of any distinctive words or phrases in 
a document, a keyword-based search can be doomed to failure. In 
addition, if one only remembers a vague time frame of the 
occurrence of certain document, then searching through 
temporally-sorted results can be unacceptably slow.  
Alternatively, as described in Thomson et al’s [4] theory, people 
remember and recall things through associations with other clues. 
A recent observatory study by Teevan et al [19] supports the 
theory that, instead of trying to directly locate the targeted 
information by keywords, people usually follow a chain of clues 
in finding the desired information. For example, users may not 
remember the particular title of a proposal or any text in it, but can 
find that proposal through some retrieval cues, such as, the person 
they have communicated with, the application they used, and 
even the rough time frame. In practice, the Feldspar system [3], 
has demonstrated the effectiveness of utilizing such retrieval 
strategy in managing document activities. Yet, research in 
applying such retrieval strategies in an enterprise environment is 
still in a preliminary stage. Our work on Taste is an investigation 
of some next steps. 
In this paper, we focus first on identifying the specific retrieval 
cues that are typically used in analyzing document activities; next, 
we describe the design of visual abstractions, based on these 
retrieval cues, that enhance the user’s ability to search for and 
share business information. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Conference’10, Month 1–2, 2010, City, State, Country. 
Copyright 2010 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0010…$10.00. 
 
To identify such retrieval cues, we conducted pre-design 
interviews with thirty employees in an international corporation. 
We found three retrieval cues that were rated highly among the 
employees: 1) The date and time when events happened. 2) 
Content keywords that are associated with document activities. 3) 
Document Types or Applications that are linked to a particular 
type of activity.  
Based on our findings, we designed Taste, an interactive visual 
analytics system that enhances the employees’ capabilities in 
searching and sharing business information. Taste, as shown in 
Figure 1., is structured to embed the retrieval cues into a 
coordinated multiple-level visualization system. Seen at a high-
level, Taste encodes these cues with a set of three visualizations, 
each of which presents a particular aspect of document activity 
information. In lower level views, Taste presents a visualization 
that integrates related activity information for a single document. 
Using this multi-level structure, Taste helps users to cohesively 
depict document activities from different points of view and to 
effectively find the desired information. Additionally, Taste 
extends the information seeking process from an individual effort 
to a group effort. Finally, Taste includes an interactive Story 
Telling view, which helps employees to collaboratively find, 
organize and share information between collaborators. 
To evaluate our system, we conducted a lab study and a field 
study. We found that most participants believed Taste to be useful 
and effective in helping them retrieve desired information.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
describes previous work on tools for managing personal activities. 
Section 3 describes domain specific retrieval cues used by 
corporate employees. Section 4 details the design of the Taste 
system. Section 5 presents our laboratory and field studies, with 
detailed results. Section 6 provides a discussion and our future 
research directions, and Section 7 presents our conclusions. 
2. RELATED WORK  
In the psychology literature, Davies and Thomson [4] have shown 
that people often remember things in association with other 
things. Studies by Tulving et al [19] have demonstrated that the 
use of contextual information to connect and to recall individual 
activities is indeed essential in information seeking processes.  
Based on these theories, many observation studies have been 
conducted to understand natural search behavior, from various 
kinds of activity information. For example, Whittaker et al [23] 
focused on analyzing email systems, while Jones el al [10] 
examined Web activities. Much of this research supports the 
theory that associations are important to human memory.  More 
generally, Teevan et al [19] have conducted an observation study 
that focused on people’s search behavior across a broad class of 
electronic types, including email, files and the Web. This study 
confirmed the theories on a broader basis and suggested that, 
instead of trying to directly locate the targeted information by 
keywords, people often follow a chain of clues in their search for 
desired information. They also observe that the support of such 
information retrieval strategies is current insufficient.  
Many computer science research and commercial products have 
provided support for various forms of searches. For example, 
desktop search engines, such as Apple Spotlight, Microsoft 
Desktop Search and Google Desktop, have been effective in 
helping people retrieve information based on keywords. Many 
systems have focused on enhancing keyword-based document 
search in various ways, including systems that utilize timeline-
based visualizations [11,16,17], interfaces representing documents 
with spatial and facet information [13,14], and systems with 
interactive tagging capabilities that iteratively refine the search 
results [5]. However, while all of these systems support certain 
retrieval aspects, their support for the multi-level retrieval 
strategies are limited. 
Four systems [3,6,12,18] are similar to Taste, in that they focus on 
integrating a broad range of electronic document types.  However, 
there are significant differences between these systems and Taste. 
Compared to Haystack [12] and SIS [6], both of which present 
activity information using integrated interfaces, our system is 
customized to support the domain specific retrieval cues in an 
enterprise environment. While both Document Card [18] and 
Taste can present detailed information for a single document, 
Taste also provides a high-level overview that helps user to 
interactively navigate through large collections of documents. 
Although both the Feldspar [3] system and Taste support a multi-
faceted retrieval strategy, Taste extends the information-seeking 
process from an individual effort to a group effort. 
In the following sections, we describe our findings relative to a set 
of three retrieval cues that are highly rated by enterprise 
employees, and report on our visualization system, which is 
designed to take advantage of these retrieval cues and to enhance 
employee capabilities for information search and sharing. 
3. COMMON RETRIEVAL CUES  
To identify those information retrieval cues that are most used in 
an enterprise environment, we conducted 30 semi-structured 
interviews with employees from Xerox Corporation. These 
Figure 1. System overview for Taste. 
interviewees held a broad range of positions, including product 
researchers who need to write proposals and research papers, 
managers who were in charge of business planning and marketing, 
and administrative staff members who oversee hiring. Our 
interview focused on examining three substantive questions: 
Table 1.  Three substantive questions  
1 How often do you need to search for document activity information? 
2 What are the typical approaches you use in searching for desired information? Including both clues and applications.  
3 How well do the applications that you use support your retrieval tasks? 
3.1 The limits in current practices 
The results of our interviews add support to previous research (see 
Section 2) that suggests that, while the some keyword-based 
approaches are used in workspaces, these applications are less 
tailored to support information seeking processes in enterprise 
environments. Many of the interviewees mentioned that they 
usually find it hard to describe things they want to find with 
keywords; some of them also told us that often the keywords they 
used were not precise enough for such search tools to have useful 
results. For example, one interviewee asked “How can I tell the 
search bar that, even though I don’t remember the title of a 
document I am trying to find, I do remember I have copied it to 
Alice in an email two weeks ago?” During our interviews, many 
employees expressed similar frustrations: they put in the effort but 
could not find any useful information.  
From these interviews, we concluded that there is need for a tool 
that could enable users to be more effective at analyzing their 
activities and retrieving desired information. 
3.2 Identifying the essential retrieval cues 
Many interviewees provided us with information about how they 
recall and search for document activity information in their daily 
routines. Combining their practical experiences and our review of 
the research literature [3,4,19], we categorized the retrieval cues 
into three major categories: 
Temporal hints contain significant information relating to 
document activities. Specifically, the interviewees mentioned that 
both the exact date and time when events occurred can be very 
helpful (e.g., when documents were received, read, created, or 
modified), and also the relative sequences of events.  
Content keywords (e.g. the title of a document or the name of a 
person or company) are often used in filtering down to the areas 
of interests during the initial stage of the retrieval process. In 
addition, it is observed that certain keywords can also help 
employees to associate and connect document activities together 
[3], and therefore lead them to recall events more precisely.  
Document Types or Particular Applications are also considered 
important clues for employees to locate desired information [13]. 
Many employees report that the first thing they think of in 
searching for document activities is often the applications they 
used. 
In addition, many interviewees mentioned that these three 
retrieval cues generally coexist during their search for the desired 
information. Therefore, it is advantageous to integrate them into 
one system and present the cues to users cohesively. 
4. INTRODUCING TASTE 
In response to the identified needs for an integrated, efficient, 
information retrieval tool tuned to the enterprise environment, we 
designed Taste, an interactive visual analytics system that aims to 
enhance corporate employee capabilities for finding and sharing 
the business information that is embedded in their daily document 
activities.  
In the following subsections, we first explain the data capturing 
process in Taste and then describe how each retrieval cue is 
depicted in our system. 
4.1 Data Capture and Storage 
At the heart of Taste is an automatic and transparently real-time 
contextual data capturer. As part of the UbiDocs project [2], Taste 
runs on a single user’s computer, and captures user activities 
around office documents, calendars, emails, Web pages, etc.  
Like a desktop search engine [7], Taste creates an index of 
documents on a user’s machine. However, unlike a desktop search 
engine, Taste also logs information about a user’s activities with 
documents. In particular, it collects information about which 
documents, emails, and web pages were read, and how long they 
were open. It also collects document metadata, such as 
information about the senders and recipients of email messages. 
Taste stores this information, along with copies of the documents, 
into a unified document repository, UpLib [9]. As shown in 
Figure 2, Taste utilizes UpLib (Data Capture and Storage) to 
extract information from and about each document, including its 
title and authors, its text, the people and other entities that it 
mentions, its paragraphs and its images. All of the captured 
information is indexed and grouped with its related documents. So 
all documents sent to Alice are associated together, and are further 
interactively presented to the user through Taste’s visualization 
interface.  
4.2 Visualization Interface 
Instead of presenting the diverse document activities through a 
keyword search interface, Taste embeds the retrieval cues into a 
coordinated mult-level visualization system.  
Figure 2.The Taste Pipeline. 
At a high level, Taste encodes the three cues with a set of three 
visualizations, each of which presents a particular aspect of the 
document activity information. To provide a lower level detailed 
view, Taste also presents a visualization that integrates related 
activity information for a single document. Using this multi-level 
structure, Taste helps users to cohesively depict document 
activities from different points of view and to effectively find 
desired information.  
4.2.1 High-level Visualization Overviews  
4.2.1.1 The Temporal View presents temporal hints  
The Temporal View shows how a user’s activities unfold over 
time. It presents both the number of documents a user interacted 
with in different time periods, and the types of those documents. 
This view is created as an interactive ThemeRiver [10], and it 
shows the temporal trends and patterns of a user’s document 
activities. In this view, each vertical axis represents a period of 
time, while horizontal ribbons indicate both the format of 
documents (i.e., email, Microsoft Word, etc.), and the time spent 
on each. For example, Figure 1(B) depicts the history of a day in 
which a user spent a significant time browsing Web pages and 
took a quick break around 3:00 pm. 
Besides showing general trends and patterns, the temporal view 
also allows the user to drill down into time periods. When the user 
selects a time period on the horizontal axis in the center of the 
view, Taste zooms into that period of time. At the same time, a 
time period summary window appears on the desktop (see Figure 
1 (E)) that presents the highest ranked N documents for that time 
period and provides the user with a quick way to return to the 
original time scale. 
4.2.1.2 Facet view shows Document Types 
To help corporate employees efficiently retrieve specific 
documents of interest, we designed the Facet View to aggregate 
both the documents and the people that a user has interacted with 
during a particular period of time. Like Lee et al [14], our facet 
view allows the user to filter and sort information based on 
automatically-extracted data facets, including type (person or 
document) and format (email, slide presentation, text document, 
etc.) The user can query this view to filter its output based on a set 
of facets. For example, the user can choose to see or hide 
activities with email, with office documents, with Web pages, or 
with people. Each of these facets can be turned on or off by 
pressing an associated button.  
In order to fit the activity information into a reasonable amount of 
screen space and in order to draw the user’s attention to the most 
important activities in each time period, Taste sorts document 
activities by importance, and displays the most important 
documents at the top and with the most salient presentation by 
computing the importance value as: 
! 
Dimportance = Fappearance * Tdwell
Tcur_start
Tcur_end
"  
In this equation, the importance of each document (Dimportance) is 
set to the number of times each document appears in the 
repository ( ) multiplied by the sum of the amount of 
time the document was open on the display ( , measured in 
milliseconds). Document importance is computed in a particular 
time frame, which is between Tcur_start to Tcur_End.  
Therefore, based on this equation, Taste considers the document 
that a user spent the most time on to represent the most important 
activity the user performed during that time period. To give users 
a sense of the importance of each document, Taste displays scale 
bars next to each document, where the length of the bar denotes 
its importance in that time period (shown in light grey as the 
background of each document in Figure 1(A)). 
To enable fast exploration, a summarized information panel (see 
Figure 1(D)) is shown when the mouse hovers over a visual 
element representing an activity. Like the Document Card [18], 
this panel includes a readable thumbnail and aggregated 
information about that visual element. If the user needs more 
details, the user can double click on the visual element to bring up 
a Detail view window (See section 4.2.1.5).  
4.2.1.3 The Entity Tag view for Content Keywords 
Since it is observed that content keywords from documents are 
helpful for information seeking, Taste extracts entities [2], such as 
company name, contacts, date/time, etc., from all of the 
documents the user has interacted with and displays them in the 
Entity Tag view. 
To enable fast entity browsing and to emphasize the most 
frequently encountered entities from a selected time period, this 
view uses a TagCloud visualization of the entities. The size of 
each entity in the TagCloud is calculated based on the equation: 
      
! 
TagSize = FEntity_appearance * FDoc_appearance * Tdwell
Tcur _ start
Tcur _ end
"  
In this equation, the entity appearance frequency ( ) 
is the number of times that the entity is mentioned in a particular 
document and the document appearance frequency ( ) 
is the number of times a document was used in a given time 
period.  
As shown in Figure 1(C), the Entity Tag view colors the extracted 
entities based on their categories, i.e. company or person. When 
the mouse hovers over an entity tag, a summarized information 
panel appears that shows the top ranked six documents that 
mention that entity. The user can double-click on an entity name 
to open a persistent window with information related to that 
entity, including a larger selection of documents that mention it. 
4.2.1.4 View Coordination  
Since information retrieval can involve the utilization of all three 
retrieval cues, Taste is structured to encapsulate these 
visualizations within a coordinated system. All the visualizations 
in Taste are coordinated so that updates in one view are 
immediately reflected in the others. For example, if the user 
zooms in on a particular time period from the temporal view, the 
facet view responds by creating a new aggregated panel, and the 
entity tag view updates its displayed entities. 
Therefore, a user can start the process of recalling document 
activities beginning from any retrieval cue that they remember. 
Updates in a coordinated view will often display information that 
is more similar to the desired information, allowing the user to 
follow a path through the visualizations and converge on the 
desired information quickly. 
4.2.1.5 Low-level Detail View 
While the above visualizations focus on presenting overviews of 
the entire collection, the Detail view depicts a single document 
from multiple perspectives, showing temporal information, related 
document information (i.e. how many versions of this document 
are available), and other information. The Detail view can be 
invoked from any view in Taste to learn more about a document 
appearing in that view. 
As shown in Figure 3, the detail view contains four panels. Figure 
3A shows the preview panel that allows the user to view the 
document without having to reopen the corresponding application. 
By comparing paragraph, image, and page layout similarities [9], 
the related documents panel (Figure 3B) recommends documents 
that are similar in content to the selected one. The temporal 
information panel (Figure 3C) shows how much time the user has 
spent on that document and when activity with it occurred. 
Finally, Figure 3D presents the entity information panel in which 
the user can browse all of the entities that were extracted from the 
document that is presented in the preview panel. 
4.3 Seeking and sharing collaboratively  
According to Pike et al. [13], the typical goal of information 
analytics is to create new understanding and communicate it to 
others. This sharing and collaborating factor is especially valuable 
in a large enterprise environment, where information can be 
spread out among multiple employees. In such workplaces, 
seeking information may require an organized effort by 
collaborating employees. Therefore, Taste supports the 
information seeking process for both individuals and groups.  
By utilizing an interactive Story Telling view, Taste allows users 
to collaboratively find information, organize it and share it. In this 
view, the user takes a more active role in information tracking. 
Like the Detail view, this view is universally supported 
throughout Taste. Whenever a user comes across an interesting 
information object in Taste, they can right click on that object to 
add it to a new or existing Story view.  
Once an element is in a Story view, as shown in Figure 4, the user 
can annotate or tag it [22]. The user can also perform basic 
grouping and sorting on the story elements. In addition, the user 
can drill down to more information about a given document or 
person by clicking on its icon. 
The story created by one user around a collection of people and 
documents may be of interest to other users as well, so Taste 
allows stories created on one instance of the system to be shared 
with users on another instance. Other employees, who receive this 
shared story, are able to modify it based on their understanding of 
the topic and add or suggest removal of story elements. By 
sharing their stories about document activities, groups of 
employees can now understand those activities better and improve 
information retrieval for all members of the group.  
While the story feature in Taste is quite new, we can already see 
that it may be useful for a number of applications, including 
capturing a related set of ideas, building an annotated 
bibliography, recording the history of a project, or sharing 
information about recent exchanges with a customer. We are still 
testing the usability and utilities of this feature in enterprise 
environments. 
5. SYSTEM EVALUATION 
To evaluate Taste, we conducted two studies: (i) a controlled 
laboratory study to assess the usability and utility of Taste’s 
interface with a fixed set of data and (ii) a field study to evaluate 
the effectiveness of Taste, which embedded with the tree retrieval 
cues, in aiding people’s information seeking process in users’ own 
work environments. 
5.1 Study Design 
5.1.1 Study Goals and Experimental Setups 
For both studies, two conditions were examined: (i) the use of 
Taste; and (ii) the use of regular Mac OS X tools [1], hereafter 
referred as RT (regular tools), including Microsoft Office for Mac 
and Google Desktop. All participants experienced both conditions 
in a counter-balanced order. 
For the field study, we first deployed the data capture module to 
each participant. Document logging for Taste was unobtrusive: 
there were no reported interruptions to the user, but each day we 
checked that the logger was active on all participant machines. 
Taste was able to sample around 200 documents during an 8-hour 
working day. The total number of documents sampled over the 
period of 1.5 weeks per participant was in the range of 1000 - 
1200. Participants were instructed not to look at their data during 
collection. The Taste interface was not installed on any of their 
machines during this period. 
Figure 4. A story that has been organized into 3 Story views. 
Figure 3. The Detail view for a selected document 
In preparation for the lab study, we used Taste to collect one-
month’s worth of workstation activity data. The resulting data 
became our test corpus. This data was diverse, containing 
different types of documents, web pages, images and emails. In 
total, there were 7,419 data objects, with over 24,275 pages. None 
of the participants had any prior exposure to this data. No new 
additions were made to the log during the study; so all participants 
accessed the same data set. For purposes of comparison, this data 
was also indexed by both Apple Spotlight and Google Desktop 
search. We ensured that all participants knew about the nature of 
the data set and locations (folders) of documents before the study 
began. 
5.1.2 Participants 
All of our participants from our hosting corporation were volun-
teers consisting of researchers, administrative staff, managers and 
business development staff. For our short-term controlled lab 
evaluation, we recruited 12 participants (5 female and 7 male) 
through email lists and by acquaintance. For the field study, six 
participants (1 female and 5 males) volunteered to use Taste on 
their personal data for 1.5 weeks during which their document 
activity was continuously logged. All were proficient users of the 
Mac OS X operating system and its applications. None of the 
participants had any prior knowledge of this project nor any prior 
experience with Taste. 
5.1.3 Procedures 
Since our participants would inevitably get more familiar with 
Taste and the sample dataset during the process of our studies 
[14], we took steps to isolate learning factors. In particular, we 
asked each participant to attend two sessions, separated by a two 
day time period. We hoped that over this time period participants 
would forget most of the details of the data set. 
To balance performance gain, we randomized the sequence of 
conditions (using Taste vs. Regular Tools) across participants. In 
addition, the allocation of time to tool was balanced across 
sessions. Each participant used either Taste or RT at the first 
session and switched to the other tool two days later. 
To ensure that the study results were comparable across sessions, 
participants were given the same task questions for each tool; 
participants were asked to find information on the same time 
frame or about the same person.  
5.1.4 Retrieval Tasks and Study Measures 
In total, we asked each participant to carry out 12 tasks (6 tasks in 
2 conditions). These tasks were identified based on our pre-design 
interviews, all of which are at least common in corporate daily 
tasks, if not predominant in all jobs. As shown in Table 1, we 
select these most representative tasks to evaluate the capability of 
Taste. 
Table 2: Task questions for both conditions in the laboratory 
study (the word ‘tool(s)’ was replaced to reflect the condition) 
Task 1: Please use tool(s) to find the most mentioned 
contacts within a particular time frame.  
Task 2: Please use tool(s) to find the most visited 
information sources within a particular time frame 
Task 3: Please use tool(s) to find and list the user's recent 
activities with Mr. Manager X 
Task 4: Please use tool(s) to locate a recent threaded email 
with attachments. 
Task 5: Please use tools(s) to locate such an email in the file 
system and find its attachments and, if possible, find 
other related documents. 
Task 6: Please use the tool(s) to prepare an activity report for 
the user's activities in time frame A. Please write 
down contents and artifacts. 
For each task, we collected and analyzed the following factors to 
measure the utility and usability of Taste:  
Accuracy: the percentage of accurately retrieved items in the 
participant’s answers. In the lab study where standard answers 
were known, we measured this factor by comparing participants’ 
answers to the standard answers; in the field study, we analyzed 
this factor together with each participant after the two study 
sessions. 
Efficiency: the time (in seconds) spent on answering each 
question.  
Confidence: a 5-point Likert scale score measuring how confident 
users were in the accuracy of their answers.  
When participants completed their tasks, we asked them two 
open-ended question about their experience using the assigned 
tool, and also asked them to score their answers on a 5-point 
Likert scale: 1)“How well do you think the provided tool covers 
your retrieval cues?”; and 2)“How do you like the design of the 
tools provided?” 
5.1.5 Results 
Due to page limits, we only report the most significant results of 
our evaluations. In general, Taste has significant advantages over 
regular tools in the following four aspects: 
Taste provided better retrieval accuracy.  
Results from both studies suggest that Taste provided participants 
with more accurate retrievals. In our lab study where participants 
had no prior knowledge about the data, the results suggested a 
Figure 5. Study results for the three measured factors: efficiency, 
accuracy, and confidence.  Lab study results are on top.  Field 
results are on the bottom. 
significant (ANOVA: F (1, 78) = 45.49, p < 0.001) 17.3% 
accuracy gain (as computed by comparing mean values (90.5-
77.13) /77.13) during both sessions, as shown in Figure 5B. Even 
though participants had prior knowledge about the data, our field 
study also indicated a significant difference (F(1, 82) = 8.80, p < 
0.004) between Taste and the regular tools on the accuracy of 
retrieving information. As shown in Figure 5E, Taste still 
delivered nearly an 8% increase ((84.88–78.57)/78.57) in 
retrieved information. 
Taste significantly improved retrieval efficiency. 
As shown in Figure 5A and 5D, both studies suggested significant 
reductions in participants’ information retrieval time, with 36.8% 
((176.3-111.3)/176.3) reduction in the lab study and 31.1% ((166-
114.3)/ 166) in the field study. The ANOVA results (lab: (F(1,82) 
= 6.13 p < 0.015) and field: (F(1,78) = 10.84, p < 0.001)) show 
that Taste helps participants perform their tasks more efficiently.  
Taste largely increased participants’ confidence  
Initially, since participants had prior knowledge about the location 
of their own data, we were expecting the confidence value to be 
similar between Taste and RT in the field study; on the other 
hand, we expected Taste to increase user confidence in the lab  
study. While the lab results (F(1, 78) = 17.12, p < 0.001) partly 
supported our expectation, the field results yielded a significant 
positive confidence increase (ANOVA (F(1, 82) = 16.16, p < 
0.0001) when using Taste. Therefore, as shown in Figure 5C and 
5F, participants trusted Taste more than the regular tools for 
retrieving their document activities. 
Taste provided a more advanced interface. 
In response to our post-task questions, Taste received an average 
4.57 out of 5 in supporting users’ retrieval cues, even though 
participants had interacted with Taste for less then an hour. By 
contrast, the regular tools scored a 3.36 on these questions. Taste 
also received an overall score of 4.34 out of 5 for usability, 
suggesting that participants felt comfortable using Taste to 
perform the tasks. One participant noted, “This interface [Taste] 
provides me more control over the data. … it makes me feel more 
confident in searching for information”. 
5.2 Summary 
Given that participants had prior knowledge of the collected data, 
it seems likely that the accuracy of their answers depended largely 
on the tools provided. Since Taste provides a cohesive visual 
interface that incorporated highly rated retrieval cues, many 
participants positively rated Taste as an aid for information 
seeking. Our field study supported this result by suggesting that 
Taste performed better than regular tools on our three measured 
factors. One participant commented that, “ By looking at all the 
[Taste] interface, I can easily relate all the information together 
and effectively examine my activities from different aspects.” 
Even if there is no previous knowledge about the data, our 
laboratory study suggests that Taste’s interface is designed 
sufficiently enough for users to follow important clues in the tasks 
and outperform the results from using regular tools.  One 
participant noted that, “[Taste] is very good at giving a quick 
impression of data across the board. I like how you can mix 
different types of files and people together and represent them 
interactively.” 
In addition, many participants found the idea of collaboratively 
searching for information interesting and the way we approached 
feature practical and useful. Although we didn’t set up a 
collaborative environment for participants due to privacy 
concerns, participants were still interested in utilizing the Story 
view and tried to share findings between different instances of 
Taste.  
While Taste has only been used by a small number of people so 
far and for a short period of time, it appears to be a promising 
technology. Participants enjoyed using Taste to retrieve 
information and shared comments like “I can definitely see myself 
using it regularly”; and “…it can be quite helpful when I need to 
quickly put together some research reports”. Based on feedback 
we have received, we believe this kind of visualization interface 
can help corporate employees  
6. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
6.1 Parameterize the document changes 
While seeking business information embedded in multiple 
document activities is important, understanding the changes of 
different version of a single document is also crucial in dynamic 
corporate environments. For example, the ability to track changes 
in different versions of legal documents can have a tremendous 
impact on how a company operates and how it adjusts to new 
rules and regulations. Unfortunately, such tracking is not 
generally supported in current personal information management 
tools. 
Taste has begun to embed this function into the Detail view, so 
users can visually depict progress and changes among different 
versions of a document. Although the current interface is still in a 
preliminary design, many participants have noticed the potential 
impacts of this feature and commented on the usefulness of it to 
help them better track and update documents.  
6.2 Embedding personal knowledge in the 
document repository 
Employees generally have their own methods for organizing and 
relating business information, based on their job requirements and 
individual experience. It is therefore interesting to consider 
whether externalizing such knowledge and embedding it into 
customized visualizations would be feasible for enhancing their 
information retrieval processes.  
Although there is no definitive way to achieve complete 
knowledge transfer, our previous research [21] suggests the 
possibility of integrating a knowledge structure with visual 
analytics systems that can help users capture, store and reuse 
domain knowledge. Specifically, we are interesting in analyzing 
the story elements a user has interactively collected using Taste, 
and translating them into knowledge artifacts that can be 
externalized to document repositories and then used as input to 
personalized search methods. 
6.3 Collaborative information retrieval 
In an enterprise environment where documents and information 
are generally decentralized, efficient information retrieval 
processes may require an organized effort including collaboration 
with other employees. While Taste has touched on collaborative 
information retrieval by providing Story views, we intend to 
extend this collaboration support to more effectively support 
groups as they seek to understand the history of their activities 
and find the information they need.  
Finally, we plan to deploy and test our approach in enterprises 
with different activity patterns, social networks, and document 
types to see how well it supports these environments and what 
modifications are needed to make it most effective in each. 
7. CONCLUSION 
In an enterprise environment, documents are of great importance 
to business operations and information flows. It is therefore 
essential for corporate employees to have an effective means to 
retrieve this information and use it in their work. Although current 
commercial products present efficient methods for keyword-based 
searches, they are not as effective in an enterprise environment, 
where information is hard to find by keywords alone. In this 
paper, we present Taste, an interactive visual analytics system that 
presents an integrated document retrieval interface. As shown in 
Figure 1, Taste has been implemented specifically to help 
corporate employees manage, review and share information about 
their document activities. In both our lab and field studies, 
statistical results suggest that Taste is more effective in retrieving 
document activities than some traditional tools. Participants have 
expressed an interest in using Taste in their daily tasks. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1] Apple Inc. Apple Mac OS X tools. Technical report, Apple 
Inc., 2009. 
[2] E. A. Bier, E. W. Ishak, and E. Chi. Entity quick click: rapid 
text copying based on automatic entity extraction. In CHI’06: 
CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pages 562–567, New York, NY, USA, 
2006. ACM. 
[3] D. H. Chau, B. Myers, and A. Faulring. What to do when 
search fails: finding information by association. In CHI ’08: 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth Annual SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 
999–1008, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM. 
[4] D. Davies, G.; Thomson. Memory in Context: Context in 
Memory. Wiley, England” 1988. 
[5] P. Dourish, W. K. Edwards, A. Lamarca, and M. Salisbury. 
Presto: an experimental architecture for fluid interactive 
document spaces. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., 
6(2):133–161, June 1999. 
[6] S. Dumais, E. Cutrell, J. Cadiz, G. Jancke, R. Sarin, and D.C. 
Robbins. Stuff i’ve seen: a system for personal information 
retrieval and re-use. In SIGIR ’03: Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research 
and Development in Informaion Retrieval, pages 72–79, 
New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM. 
[7] Google. Google desktop. Technical report, Google, 2009. 
[8] International Data Corporation. IDC: worldwide research 
report. Technical report, International Data Corporation, 
2009 
[9] W. Janssen. The uplib personal digital library system. In 
JCDL ’05: Proceedings of the 5th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint 
Conference on Digital Libraries, pages 410–410, New York, 
NY, USA, 2005. ACM. 
[10] W. Jones, S. Dumais, and H. Bruce. Once found, what then?: 
A study of “keeping” behaviors in the personal use of web 
information. Proceedings of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 39(1):391–402, 2005. 
[11] T. Kapler and W. Wright. Geotime information visualization. 
Information Visualization, 4(2):136–146, 2005. 
[12] D. R. Karger and D. Quan. Haystack: a user interface for 
creating, browsing, and organizing arbitrary semistructured 
information. In CHI ’04: CHI ’04 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 777–778, New 
York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM. 
[13] PNNL, In-spire. Technical report, Pacific Northwest 
National Laboratory, 2009. 
[14] B. Lee, G. Smith, G. G. Robertson, M. Czerwinski, and D. S. 
Tan. Facetlens: exposing trends and relationships to support 
sensemaking within faceted datasets. In CHI ’09: 
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference On Human 
Factors In Computing Systems, pages 1293–1302, New 
York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. 
[15] L. Nelson, C. Held, P. Pirolli, L. Hong, D. Schiano, and E. H. 
Chi. With a little help from my friends: examining the impact 
of social annotations in sensemaking tasks. In CHI ’09: 
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1795–1798, New 
York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM. 
[16] J. Rekimoto. Time-machine computing: a time-centric 
approach for the information environment. In UIST ’99: 
Proceedings of the 12th Annual ACM Symposium on User 
Interface Software and Technology, pages 45–54, New York, 
NY, USA, 1999. ACM. 
[17] M. Ringel, E. Cutrell, S. Dumais, and E. Horvitz. Milestones 
in time: The value of landmarks in retrieving information 
from personal stores. In Proceedings of Interact 2003, pages 
184–191, 2003. 
[18] H. Strobelt, D. Oelke, C. Rohrdantz, A. Stoffel, D. A. Keim, 
and O. Deussen. Document cards: A top trumps visualization 
for documents. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, 15(6):1145–1152, 2009. 
[19] J. Teevan, C. Alvarado, M. S. Ackerman, and D. R. Karger. 
The perfect search engine is not enough: a study of 
orienteering behavior in directed search. In CHI ’04: 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pages 415–422, New York, NY, USA, 
2004. ACM. 
[20] D. M. Tulving, Endel; Thomson. Encoding specificity and 
retrieval processes in episodic memory. In Psychological 
Review, volume 80, pages 352–373, Sep 1973. 
[21] X. Wang, D. H. Jeong, W. Dou, S.-W. Lee, W. Ribarsky, and 
R. Chang. Knowledge assisted visualization: Defining and 
applying knowledge conversion processes to a visual 
analytics system. Comput. Graph., 33(5):616–623, 2009. 
[22] C. Weng and J. H. Gennari. Asynchronous collaborative 
writing through annotations. In CSCW ’04: Proceedings of 
the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work, pages 578–581, New York, NY, USA, 
2004. ACM. 
[23] S. Whittaker, V. Bellotti, and J. Gwizdka. Email in personal 
information management. Commun. ACM;, 49(1):68–73, 
2006

