Heads Up: Using Cognitive Mapping to Develop a Baseline
Description for Urban Visualization
Submission #513
ABSTRACT
Mapping interfaces have become increasingly important, par-
ticularly with the spread of mobile devices (GPS, cell phones).
While a plethora of data is available, there is little quantita-
tive information about how to prioritize the display. Build-
ing on the work of geographers, urban designers and cogni-
tive scientists focused on cognitive maps, we propose three
elements for urban visualization; segments, landmarks and
neighborhoods. We then conducted a user study of 55 stu-
dents’ sketch maps of Chicago that tests the frequency of
these three elements, their interrelationship and the effect
of gender, age, experience and scale. We conclude that all
three types of elements are used, that competent cognitive
maps involve relatively small numbers of elements (17 +/-
12), that the number of landmarks and neighborhoods are
negatively related to the number of segments, that scale may
influence the relative proportion of elements and that gender
and age are worth considering in customizing interfaces.
Author Keywords
Cognitive Map, Visualization, Recall, Geography, Urban De-
sign, Cognitive Science
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.2 Information Interfaces and Presentation: Miscellaneous—
User Interfaces
INTRODUCTION
Interface designers have increasingly turned their attention
to urban mapping applications, relying on the work of geog-
raphers, urban designers and cognitive scientists for insights
about how to configure interfaces. But there has been very
little quantitative analysis of the elements of such interfaces
and their interrelationship for the user.
The considerable literature from urbanism, cognitive science
and geography establishes criteria and methods for urban
legibility. The central concept of such work is the idea of
a cognitive map, which proposes that the brain can acquire,
code, store, recall, and decode information about the relative
Submitted for review to CHI 2009.
locations and attributes of various phenomena in their spatial
context. This work has established fundamental elements of
cognitive maps and has studied the uses and development
of cognitive maps in different settings and by different user
groups.
Our objectives in this paper are:
• From the study of existing literature in a wide range of
disciplines, extract a simple but complete set of spatial
elements (landmarks, segments, neighborhoods) that are
essential to constructing cognitive maps;
• By means of a user study, establish the base level for each
element for a competent description of a cognitive map;
• Measure and study the relative interdependence of each
element in describing an urban environment;
• Discover any differences in the number of elements for
users based on age, previous experience and gender.
We begin with a review of previous work that leads to the
establishment of three classes of elements (landmarks, seg-
ments, and neighborhoods) that serve as the basis for our
study. These three elements have several interesting proper-
ties, including differing degrees of locational precision. A
landmark is seen as one specific point, a segment is a re-
garded as a line, and a neighborhood is often a loosely de-
fined area.
In order to generate a baseline description of a cognitive
map, we conducted a user study of architectural students af-
ter a four-day field trip to Chicago, distant from their home
university. Specifically, we chose to examine hand-drawn
sketch maps as a tool to extract information from partici-
pants’ cognitive maps of each city. Sketch maps show only
limited or schematized information about the environment
allowing for the most memorable and relevant information
of one’s mental representation to surface. Therefore, we
asked each student to draw a sketch map of the city they
visited, using an open question protocol. The resulting maps
were coded to identify spatial characteristics of the city us-
ing landmark, segment, and neighborhood elements.
Our subsequent analysis was aimed at establishing a baseline
for a competent cognitive map. How many landmarks, seg-
ments, and neighborhoods did participants on average feel
were necessary to use in order to give a clear depiction of
the city? Just as important, we wanted to determine if the
1
use of one type of element substitutes for another. If you
identify a lot of landmarks, do you in general use fewer seg-
ment elements? Does previous knowledge of a city affect
your use of elements? Does gender or age?
The result of this study is an understanding of the number,
type and interdependence of elements that form a description
of an urban setting that can serve as a guide for interface
designers.
RELATED WORK
In recent years, several innovative mapping applications have
been proposed that used cognitive mapping, although with-
out any quantitative understanding about the elements that
constitute such a cognitive map.
LineDrive [1] is an interface that incorporates principles of
map distortion to the rendering of routes, adjusting lengths
and angles to more closely approximate the kind of simpli-
fications that mimic human users. This approach focuses al-
most entirely on segment elements, and demonstrates a sub-
tle and effective adjustment to individual users. The short-
coming of this approach is the lack of contextual informa-
tion, leading to problems with users becoming confused af-
ter a single wrong turn.
Copernicus [17] attempts to correct flaws within the LineDrive
system by adding context to the interface. Generally, this in-
volves adding segments and neighborhoods (cities and towns)
to the segments from LineDrive. This represents an advance
in terms of legibility, but leaves unsolved the issue of how
much information to display and which types of elements
should be used.
Work at Carneige Mellon on the MOVE system has devel-
oped mapping software that uses some of the principles from
LineDrive in a two dimension interactive network that ad-
justs as the user moves through the city [11]. This corrects
some of the original problems, but does not seek to address
directly the issues of cognitive mapping.
Some interfaces have attempted to incorporate landmarks
into maps [6], focusing on selection processes for identi-
fying landmarks and geo-referencing them on tourist maps.
This represents an advance in sort the data related to land-
marks, but it does not address their relationship to the user.
There has also been some effort related to GPS navigation
system in cars, notably at SIGCHI 2008. The foci of these
studies have been general evaluation of user behavior while
in the car [12], performance of a driving simulator to study
accuracy rates of proposed systems [7], or an evaluation of
quick search versus categorical semantic search systems [10].
But again none of this research has sought to establish guide-
lines for display visualizations.
Therefore, we identify a need to rely on the research of urban
planners, cognitive scientists and geographers who examine
the question of urban legibility. More specifically, we are
interested in research that identifies a base set of spatial el-
ements that are recognizable in any city. While each field
of research focuses on cognitive maps of the city in unique
ways, we want to address the most relevant work in rela-
tion to our focus on element recognition, setting aside issues
of spatial proximity judgments and element recognition se-
quencing.
We should be clear about our use of the terms cognitive map
and sketch map. By cognitive map we mean the internal
mental image that enables people to code, store and decode
spatial information. By sketch map, we mean an external
representation of a cognitive map that is solicited by the need
to communicate in daily life (and by researchers).
Cognitive Science
The term cognitive map was first used by psychologist Ed-
ward Tolman in “Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men” [15]. He
describes a maze previously mastered by rats that is blocked
at a critical point and replaced by a series of radially ar-
ranged alternatives. His finding is that the rats greatly pre-
ferred the route that demonstrated an understanding of the
spatial overview of the maze. Partly a reaction against strict
behaviorism, his work leads to the development of cognitive
psychology.
As Barbara Tversky [16] has noted, within psychology the
current interest centers on issues of categorical error rather
than on fundamental processes of interaction with the world.
We have centered our search on other disciplines that are
more focused on active involvement with urban environments.
Urban Design and Planning
The work of Kevin Lynch [13] is one starting point for our
study. He claims that the city’s image is represented in mem-
ory through five common elements: path, edge, district, node
and landmark. Lynch’s elements are recognizable in most
urban settings but some have proven to be more frequently
used by subsequent researchers. We use these elements as a
baseline set of urban elements from which to work.
Donald Appleyard, a collaborator of Lynch’s, also works in
the field of environmental cognition and planning. While
most of Appleyard’s work focused on a view of the city from
a navigational standpoint, his work in the city of Ciudad
Guayana [2] also addresses the image of the environment
as a tool to plan for a better community.
Geography
While many of these methods relate to the sequential de-
velopment of a cognitive map, our objective is to identify a
common understanding within the field of the elements nec-
essary for a cognitive map.
Research methods of environmental cognition follow a com-
mon set of integrated steps that define the process of recall-
ing the environment [5]. First, a person acquires declarative
knowledge of discrete places, things, and events. Next, they
develop an understanding of a node and path sequencing of
the environment. This provides the subject with a connective
structure of transit paths and concentrated locations. Last,
2
Sketch Map 1
Vector Map 1
Sketch Map 2
Vector Map 2
Sketch Map 3
Vector Map 3
Figure 1. Sample Sketch Maps (top row) and their corresponding Vector Maps (bottom row). In the Vector Maps, segments are drawn as red lines,
neighborhoods as blue rectangles, and landmarks as green dots (or rectangles).
a completely integrated spatial representation is developed
including characteristics of distance, direction, orientation,
proximity, clustering, and hierarchical ordering.
In addition to these fundamental processes that occur in cog-
nitive map development, Evans et al. [3] develop a theory
from a study using participant sketch maps drawn over a pe-
riod of ten months. Their findings suggest that landmarks
and relative locations are among the first components that
are learned, followed by paths, and then building from the
framework of paths the initial relative locations become more
precise. As a three step process, this serves as an incremen-
tal approach for which to understand the relationships and
integration of elements in the environment.
Hintzman et al. [9] reconfirm a sequential development of a
cognitive map based on studies of orientation and target do-
mains. They argue that instead of recalling the environment
as a holistic cognitive map participants first recall the origin
and target in memory, activate the shortest route between
them, and then span the route for correct response.
Golledge [4] focuses on the development of cognitive maps
starting with specific landmarks to larger general areas. His
findings suggest recognition of the environment begins with
recall of landmarks, then the paths that connect the land-
marks. Finally, a spread effect occurs for the location of
regional knowledge of place. He refers to this step as devel-
oping concepts of neighborhood and community.
Elements of Cognitive Maps
Our conclusion from this research is that we could establish
landmark, segment and neighborhood as three elements of
cognitive maps that have been most frequently identified by
researchers in different fields as the primary elements that
constitute the construction of cognitive maps. Identification
of these elements in sketch maps would give us reliable mea-
sures to compare individual effort toward a collective com-
petency of mental representation of the city.
We have chosen to use the terms landmarks, segments and
neighborhoods rather than more neutral, geometric terms to
recognize that semantic meaning usually is comingled with
spatial information, although this current paper does not at-
tempt to address this difference directly. There is also a sig-
nificant difference in the attachment of semantic information
to each type of element, with the landmark having one pre-
cise semantic label, the segment a set along the line and the
neighborhood a loose set of semantic descriptors.
USER EXPERIMENT
This investigation focuses on cognitive representations of
the environment using participant sketch maps. While prior
3
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 0.7916 0.8259 0.92 0.338
Age -0.0100 0.0416 0.06 0.810
Gender 0.1062 0.1659 0.41 0.522
Prior Experience -0.2274 0.1933 1.38 0.239
Scale 0.6402 0.1558 16.88 0.000
Table 1. Negative Binomial Regression of Neighborhood Counts on Socio-economic and Contextual Variables. Note: For gender, male is coded ‘1’,
female is coded ‘0’. Some prior travel to Chicago is coded ‘1’; ‘0’ otherwise; A local scale is coded ‘0’, and citywide is coded ‘1’. The same coding
convention is used throughout the paper.
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 4.2380 0.9182 21.30 0.0001
Age -0.1232 0.0464 7.04 0.008
Gender 0.3300 0.1515 4.74 0.029
Prior Experience -0.2742 0.1764 2.42 0.120
Scale -0.2093 0.1638 1.63 0.201
Table 2. Negative Binomial Regression of Landmark Counts on Socio-economic and Contextual Variables
studies focus on the order of element recall [3, 5, 4, 9, 14],
elements of navigational recall [2], or an overall image of a
place one experiences [13], our study aims to quantitatively
uncover the baseline elements necessary for a cognitive map
of a city.
Participants
Fifty-five college students (22 females and 33 males) par-
ticipated in the experiment based in the city of Chicago.
Participants’ ages ranged from 19 to 26. Based on ques-
tionnaire responses, 13 of the 55 participants said they had
visited Chicago prior to the trip leading to the experiment.
Therefore, to ensure the results of the study were consis-
tent, we carefully analyzed the 13 sketch maps by testing for
the equality of group means (Student’s t-tests) and found no
statistically significant difference in any measure of element
recognition analyzed in comparison to the participants who
never visited Chicago prior to the experiment.
Study Area
Each participant traveled to the city of Chicago for a period
of four days as part of a class field trip. Participants were
required to travel as a class to a large number of locations
widely distributed across the city. For approximately 50%
of their time, participants were free to travel the city inde-
pendently or in small groups.
Procedure
Two days after returning from the trip participants gathered
in a study room equipped with a desk (each spaced a dis-
tance apart), a questionnaire (see section Experiment Ques-
tionnaire), and a writing utensil. To start, participants were
given a brief overview of the study for the first time, but
were not told about specific elements later used for analysis.
Participants were then instructed to complete all questions
in a thorough manner and to take as much time as needed.
The study was complete after each participant finished and
returned the experiment questionnaire.
Experiment Questionnaire
The experiment questionnaire primarily consisted of a recall
exercise including the drawing of a sketch map of the city.
Other questions included background information about the
participant such as gender, age, prior visits, and length of
prior visit, if any.
The sketch mapping statement was phrased, ”Now that you
have traveled to Chicago, think about the environment you
experienced. Imagine that you have a friend who has never
been there before. Draw them a map to help them to under-
stand and navigate Chicago.” We intentionally left the state-
ment fairly open ended to allow the participant to draw freely
in order to capture the most influential elements in each per-
son’s cognitive map of a place.
Data Extraction
Upon completion of the user study, each map was digitally
scanned and converted into a vector file based on the land-
mark, segment, and neighborhood element classes (see Fig-
ure 1). A researcher then performed content analysis by
counting the number of landmarks, segments and neighbor-
hoods drawn on each map and recorded the data. The re-
searcher also analyzed each map based on relative scale to
determine if it represented a local or citywide view of the
city [2] and sorted the sketch maps accordingly. Thus, three
sets of data were formed: landmarks, segments, and neigh-
borhoods from local maps; landmarks, segments and neigh-
borhoods from citywide maps; and landmarks, segments and
neighborhoods from both local and citywide maps combined.
Data Analysis Procedures
Distribution analysis is the first method used to analyze the
data. Here we are interested in comparing the results of
the Chicago maps independently using three data sets: lo-
cal maps, citywide maps, and local and citywide maps com-
bined. In distribution analysis the elements are considered
individually. We calculate the mean, median, mode, range
and standard deviation of the total count of landmarks, the
4
total count of segments, and the total count of neighborhoods
in each data set.
In addition to distribution analysis for each element indepen-
dently, we pool together the three element types and deter-
mine the average number of total elements the subjects used
in local, citywide, and local and citywide maps. The stan-
dard deviation of this additional dataset is calculated as well.
Through this distribution analysis we are looking for trends
or inconsistencies regarding the number of each of the three
elements used in sketched maps of Chicago, as well as in
the total number of elements used in the sketched maps. The
standard deviations serve as indicators as to how closely the
data cling to the sample mean. A small standard deviation
indicates a set of data distributed tightly around the mean,
whereas a large standard deviation indicates a wide range of
element numbers across the sample of experiment partici-
pants.
Next, a series of t tests are applied to test for the invariance
of several measures of urban legibility across gender groups,
the scale of the map sketched, and according to whether prior
visits to Chicago were made. In particular, we look at the to-
tal number of elements reported on each sketched map, the
proportion of neighborhoods to other elements, the propor-
tion of neighborhoods to all three elements, the proportion
of segments to other elements, the proportion of segments to
all elements, the proportion of landmarks to other elements,
the proportion of landmarks to all elements, and finally the
proportions of segments to landmarks, of segments to neigh-
borhoods, and of landmarks to neighborhoods.
Multivariate regression models of the proportion of each map
element to the other two elements combined, as well as to
each of the other two map elements taken separately, are es-
timated through ordinary least squares to understand the pat-
tern of covariance among map elements in individual maps
and the influence of socio-demographic and experiential fac-
tors.
Finally, multivariate regression models of the total count of
elements, as well as of the count of each element type are es-
timated. Given the non-normal distribution of these depen-
dent variables, a negative binomial regression framework is
used for this purpose and estimation is conducted through
maximum likelihood.
In all cases, statistical significance is evaluated at the 0.05
level and all models are estimated with SAS 9.3.
RESULTS
Distribution analysis is performed on the number of land-
marks, segments, and neighborhoods in three data sets. In
the data set of local maps, the segment counts return a mean
of 8.79, a median of 8.5, a mode of 10, a range of 0-19, and
a standard deviation of 5.24. The landmark counts returns a
mean of 6.89, a median of 7, a mode of 8, a range of 0-20,
and a standard deviation of 4.13. The neighborhood counts
returns a mean of 1.84, a median of 2, a mode of 2, a range
of 0-4, and a standard deviation of 1.08.
In the data set of citywide maps, the segment counts return a
mean of 8, a median of 5, a mode of 6, a range of 0-40, and
a standard deviation of 10.06. The landmark counts return a
mean of 5, a median of 5, a mode of 6, a range of 0-12, and a
standard deviation of 2.55. The neighborhood counts return
a mean of 3.14, a median of 4, a mode of 4, a range of 0-6,
and a standard deviation of 1.87.
In the data set of combined local and citywide maps, the
segment counts return a mean of 8.55, a median of 7, a mode
of 6, a range of 0-40, and a standard deviation of 6.99. The
landmark counts return a mean of 6.31, a median of 6, a
mode of 5, a range of 0-20, and a standard deviation of 3.79.
The neighborhood counts return a mean of 2.33, a median of
2, a mode of 2, a range of 0-6, and a standard deviation of
1.54. These three data spreads are represented in Figure 2.
As indicated earlier, a battery of t-tests of equality of group
means has not detected any significant effect of having had
prior experience of the city of Chicago on the cognitive map-
ping of the city with constructs of landmarks, segments, and
neighborhoods. The scale of the map (local versus city-
wide) sketched by each participant is found to be a signif-
icant discriminating factors of a few measures of element
recognition, namely the proportion of neighborhoods to all
elements (10.8% on local maps against 23.9% on citywide
maps; t value of 3.52), the proportion of landmarks to neigh-
borhoods (4.4 on local maps versus 1.7 on citywide maps;
t value of 4.3), and the proportion of neighborhoods to seg-
ments and landmarks (12.9% on local maps versus 36.2%
on citywide maps; t value of 3.43). Tests involving other
measures of urban legality reveal no scale dependence. Fi-
nally, tests of means are largely inclusive as to the influence
of gender on the mix of urban elements recognized by indi-
viduals. Of all the measures tested, only the proportion of
landmarks to the combined number of segments and neigh-
borhoods used in a sketch is significantly larger for males
(1.1 on average) than for females (0.6 on average) (t value of
2.2).
The regression analyses performed on the sketch maps of
Chicago returned a number of results informing on how the
three element types are used jointly to represent the city, and
on the variability of the resulting constructs across socio-
economic groups and other conditions. First, while the to-
tal number of elements used is found to be independent of
age, gender, prior experience of the city, and representational
scale, more subtle patterns emerge when each of the three
types of elements is examined in turn. The first negative bi-
nomial regression is performed on the neighborhood totals
(Table 1) with a deviance of 57.7. While age, gender, and
prior experience are not significant factors, scale is. Consis-
tently with expectations, more elements tend to be used as
large sections of a city are represented. The number of land-
marks is larger among male and young respondents, while
scale and prior visits to Chicago has no effect on the num-
ber of landmarks (Table 2) (deviance of 64.9). The number
of segments cannot be significantly explained by any of the
tested factors.
5
(a) Segments used in sketch maps
(b) Landmarks used in sketch maps
(c) Neighborhoods used in sketch maps
Figure 2. Histograms of landmarks, segments, and neighborhoods
In a second set of negative binomial regressions, the number
of elements of each type is regressed against the number of
map elements of the other two types. Results are reported
in Tables 3a, b, and c. While the number of landmarks used
is higher in maps with fewer segments, there is no statistical
relationship with the number of neighborhoods incorporated
in the sketched map. Also, there is a weak inverse associ-
ation between the number of segments and the number of
neighborhoods (significance level of 6.84%), but not with
the number of landmarks. As indicated by Table 3c, neigh-
borhood elements cannot be predicted by the segment and
landmark totals. The three-way relationships between the
types of elements used in map sketching are depicted graph-
ically in Figure 3.
The third set of regressions focuses on the identification of
significant correlates of the mix of map elements used to
sketch maps of Chicago. Proportions of each type of el-
ements to other types, either collectively or separately are
the dependent variables in each model estimated by ordinary
least squares. No correlates of the proportion of segments
has been identified (Table 4a), while a significantly higher
proportion of neighborhoods is found in citywide maps (Ta-
ble 4c). Finally, landmarks are found to be relatively more
common in maps drawn by male and younger respondents
(Table 4b).
DISCUSSION
The main focus of this paper is to establish guidelines for
cognitive maps that are recognized as competent by users
and to discover any correlations between types of map ele-
ments. We have assumed that sketch maps as drawn by users
represent in the aggregate a competent representation of the
city, and therefore accurately reflect cognitive maps as men-
tal processes.
Based on our study, users tend to use all three types of el-
ements (segments, landmarks, neighborhoods) in construct-
ing cognitive maps.
Cognitive Map Elements
Our first finding is that users employ a relatively small num-
ber of total elements, 17.19 (+/-12.32). Although there is no
absolute definition for “small”, our finding is many less ele-
ments than the number in most maps or displays currently in
use. This finding may be consistent with research about the
limits of human memory for independent variables. More
specifically, we find mean values for the use of 8.55 (+/-
6.99) segments, 6.31 (+/-3.79) landmarks and 2.33 (+/-1.54)
areas.
The tendency to identify segments and landmarks with greater
frequency than neighborhoods (about three to four more fre-
quent) is, we believe, due to the more diffuse shape of neigh-
borhoods making them more difficult to place on a map.
Figure 3. Significant Relationships between Map Elements
6
(a)Dependent variable = Number of Segments;
Deviance = 65.0; 52 Degrees of Freedom
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 2.7294 0.2428 126.33 0.0001
Number of Landmarks -0.0430 0.0266 2.63 0.105
Number of Neighborhoods -0.1539 0.0845 3.32 0.068
(b)Dependent variable = Number of Landmarks;
Deviance = 62.1; 52 Degrees of Freedom
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 1.9735 0.1996 97.78 0.0001
Number of Landmarks -0.0326 0.0135 5.79 0.016
Number of Neighborhoods 0.0517 0.0527 0.96 0.326
(c)Dependent variable = Number of Neighborhoods;
Deviance = 58.1; 52 Degrees of Freedom
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 0.88130 0.2206 15.96 0.0001
Number of Landmarks 0.0243 0.0223 1.19 0.275
Number of Neighborhoods -0.0247 0.0147 2.84 0.092
Table 3. Negative Binomial Regression of Segment Counts (a), Landmark Counts (b), and Neighborhood Counts (c)
There is a fairly wide range in the number of each element
that users choose to use, which probably reflects some vari-
ation in personal style. Our study indicates that the total
number of elements in a cognitive map should be restricted
to a maximum of 30 total elements, which would be within
the standard deviation found in our study.
We found that there is no significant difference in the total
number of elements based on the four factors that we studied
(age, gender, experience or scale). This leads us to conclude
that an interface designer can be confident that the use of
this number of total elements is likely to be successful with
a wide demographic, and is probably related to the cognitive
load that seems tolerable for a wide range of users.
Use of Map Elements
We were also interested in the use of each of the three types
of element, and if one type of element could substitute for
another in the construction of a cognitive map. If, for exam-
ple, an interface presented more neighborhoods, is it likely
that fewer segments were needed to establish a competent
cognitive map?
Our finding is that most of the relationships between ele-
ments do not have significant interrelationships. One excep-
tion is the relationship between the use of segments and land-
marks. It appears that the use of segments leads to a decrease
in the number of landmarks, which suggests that they may
substitute for each other in constructing a cognitive map, al-
though the reverse relationship does not hold in general (see
Figure 4).
We also notice a trend toward a relationship between seg-
ments and neighborhoods; again, as neighborhoods decrease,
segments increase; yet the reverse is not substantiated by the
statistical analysis.
Taken together, this suggests that an there may be a rela-
tionship between the number of segments and the number
of neighborhoods and landmarks. As our identification of
meaningful landmarks and neighborhoods improves, it may
affect the number of segments in the cognitive map.
Use of Elements with Age, Gender, Experience or Scale
We were also interested in how age, gender, experience and
scale should be taken into consideration when designing map
interfaces.
Our results indicate that gender and age have a significant
impact on the formation of cognitive maps.
We find that men and younger subjects use significantly more
landmarks, both in absolute terms as well as in proportion to
segments and neighborhoods. This is corroborated by the
finding that the ratio of landmarks to neighborhoods signif-
icantly varies by age, with younger subjects using signif-
icantly more landmarks. Given the narrow range of ages
within the study, it is surprising to find significant differ-
ences in the use of landmarks, especially considering that
previous experience in the city has no significant impact on
the same measure.
This suggests that urban interface designers should consider
tailoring their interfaces to gender and age, specifically tar-
geting landmarks as the most likely area to adjust the in-
terface. However, it should be noted that our finding that
men tend to generate more landmarks in a sketch map is
seemingly incompatible with the common finding in cogni-
tive science that women tend to remember more landmarks
than men during route recall and navigation tasks [8]. While
this contrast may be attributed to differences between route-
driven tasks and the higher-level city mapping task used in
our study, it does suggest that we should be cautious in in-
7
(a)Dependent variable = Proportion of Segments
to Landmarks and Neighborhoods; R2 = 9.37%
Parameter Estimate Standard Error T value Probability
Intercept -4.4744 4.6100 -0.97 0.337
Age 0.2566 0.2307 1.11 0.271
Gender 0.2985 0.8259 0.36 0.719
Prior Visits 1.4003 0.9116 1.54 0.131
Scale 0.5589 0.8524 0.66 0.515
(b)Dependent variable = Proportion of Landmarks
to Segments and Neighborhoods; R2 = 14.7%
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept 3.7719 1.4832 2.54 0.014
Age -0.1591 0.0747 -2.13 0.038
Gender 0.6237 0.2673 2.33 0.023
Prior Visits -0.1341 0.3043 -0.44 0.661
Scale 0.0244 0.2814 0.09 0.931
(c)Dependent variable = Proportion of Neighborhoods
to Segments and Landmarks; R2 = 31.49%
Parameter Estimate Standard Error Chi Square Probability
Intercept -0.1152 0.2793 -0.41 0.681
Age 0.0136 0.0141 0.97 0.337
Gender -0.0398 0.0493 -0.81 0.423
Prior Visits -0.0286 0.0555 -0.52 0.608
Scale 0.2256 0.0517 4.36 0.0001
Table 4. Regression of the Proportions of Segments (a), Landmarks (b), and Neighborhoods (c), to Other Map Elements
terpreting our gender-related findings. Future work would
be needed to explain this effect.
We also find significant differences as the scale of the map is
increased (see Figure ). The proportion of the neighborhoods
to the combined of the other two elements is very signifi-
cantly higher when the scale is higher. Neighborhoods are
often specifically named at the larger scale of the city, and we
might expect them to be more prominent as we zoom out to
this larger scale. But there is nothing natural about the scale
at which areas are named. As a process, areas are semanti-
cally rich; that is, they can combine many different kinds of
information into a single element. Our findings about neigh-
borhoods may imply if we are able to use these labels as an
alternative to segments and landmarks, they may be able to
bring more information to a map with fewer elements.
Heads Up and Drill Down
The use of cognitive maps in urban visualization impacts at
least two types of interfaces.
The most obvious impact is on what we might call “heads
up” applications. These types of application are for devices
that must convey a maximum amount of information as quickly
as possible. Mobile devices of all types, including but not
limited to GPS devices, must not distract drivers or users
from their immediate task. Cognitive maps can provide in-
terface designers with a quantitative understanding of the
most important elements and their relationship, helping to
set limits on the numbers and type of elements.
By contrast, urban mapping and visualization may seem un-
likely candidates because of the immense amount of data
(layer upon layer of information about roads, buildings, flood
zones, businesses, etc.) and the heterogeneity of the infor-
mation. But here too, cognitive maps provide us with in-
sights about the layering of information. Given a complex
set of data, an interface designer will need to sift through
this wealth of information to foreground the most important
and provide a hierarchy of primary, secondary and tertiary
information within a densely packed interface. Cognitive
maps, because of the difference between the three elements,
also guides an understanding of how spatial and semantic
information can be engaged at the same time. In this case,
cognitive maps provide us with guidance for “drilling down”
into information.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We conclude that segments, landmarks and neighborhoods
are used in the construction of cognitive maps and that such
maps involve relatively small numbers of elements (17 +/-
12).
We also find that the number of landmarks and neighbor-
hoods are negatively related to the number of segments, that
scale may influence the relative proportion of elements and
that gender and age are worth considering in customizing
interfaces.
Our research has been limited at this point to Chicago. Ex-
tending this to other cities will provide additional informa-
8
(a) A sketch map demonstrating fewer than average neighbor-
hoods and more than average segments
(b) A sketch map demonstrating fewer than average landmarks
and more than average segments
Figure 4. Two sketch maps showing the inverse relationships between (a) segments and landmarks and (b) segments and neighborhoods
(a) A sketch map drawn at the local scale where the area depicted
in the map only covers a few blocks of the city
(b) A sketch map drawn at the city scale where the area depicted
in the map covers most of the city
Figure 5. Two sketch maps demonstrating the two different scales: (a) local scale and (b) city scale
tion both about the validity of our analysis, and with an un-
derstanding of how cities may differ.
We also believe that another study can be designed to study
more specifically the relationships between landmarks, seg-
ments and neighborhoods.
We are also interested in how the idea of neighborhoods can
be understood as an aspect of urban visualization. As the
amount of data about cities continues to expand and become
available to mobile devices, the ability to generate meaning-
ful clusters of data within a city may become a key aspect of
the formation of cognitive maps.
REFERENCES
1. M. Agrawala and C. Stolte. Rendering effective route
maps: improving usability through generalization. In
SIGGRAPH ’01: Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, pages 241–249, New York, NY, USA,
2001. ACM.
2. D. Appleyard. Planning a Pluralist City: Conflicting
Realities in Ciudad Guayana. MIT Press, New York,
1976.
3. W. G. Evans, D. Marrero, and P. Butler. Environmental
learning and cognitive mapping. Environment and
Behavior, 13(1):83–104, 1981.
4. R. G. Golledge. Timing Space and Spacing Time,
chapter Learning about Urban Environments, pages
76–98. Edward Arnold, 1978.
5. R. G. Golledge. Handbook of Environmental
Psychology, volume 1, chapter Environmental
Cognition, pages 131–174. John Wiley and Sons, 1987.
6. F. Grabler, M. Agrawala, R. Summer, and M. Pauly.
Automatic generation of tourist maps. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 27(3):Article 100, 2008.
7. S. Graf, W. Spiessl, A. Schmidt, A. Winter, and
G. Rigoll. In-car interaction using search-based user
9
interfaces. In CHI ’08: Proceeding of the twenty-sixth
annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, pages 1685–1688, New York, NY,
USA, 2008. ACM.
8. D. F. Halpern. Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2000.
9. D. Hintzman, C. O’Dell, and D. Arndt. Orientation in
cognitive maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13:149–206,
1981.
10. I.-M. Jonsson, H. Harris, and C. Nass. How accurate
must an in-car information system be?: consequences
of accurate and inaccurate information in cars. In CHI
’08: Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 1665–1674, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
11. J. Lee, J. Forlizzi, and S. E. Hudson. Iterative design of
move: A situationally appropriate vehicle navigation
system. volume 66, pages 198–215, Duluth, MN, USA,
2008. Academic Press, Inc.
12. G. Leshed, T. Velden, O. Rieger, B. Kot, and
P. Sengers. In-car gps navigation: engagement with and
disengagement from the environment. In CHI ’08:
Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 1675–1684, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
13. K. Lynch. Image of the City. MIT Press, New York,
1960.
14. A. Siegel and S. White. Advances in Child
Development and Behavior, volume 10, chapter The
Development of Spatial Representations of large-Scale
Environments. Academic, 1975.
15. E. Tolman. Psychological Review, volume 55, chapter
Cognitive Maps in Rats and Men, pages 189–208.
American Psychological Association, 1948.
16. B. Tversky. Cognition, evolution, and rationality: A
cognitive science for the XXIst century, chapter How to
get around by mind and body: Spatial thought, spatial
action. Routledge, 2005.
17. H. Ziegler and D. Keim. Copernicus:
Context-preserving engine for route navigation with
interactive user-modifiable scaling. Computer Graphcis
Forum, 27(3):927–934, 2008.
10

