EUROGRAPHICS 2008 / A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)
Volume 27 (2008), Number 3
Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism
paper ID 1185
Abstract
Recent increases in terrorist activity around the world have made analyzing and understanding such activities
more critical than ever. With the help of organizations such as the National Center for the Study of Terrorism and
Responses to Terrorism (START), we now have detailed historical information on each terrorist event around the
world since 1970. However, due to the size and complexity of the data, identifying terrorists’ patterns and trends
has been difficult. To better enable investigators in understanding terrorist activities, we propose a visual analyt-
ical system that focuses on depicting one of the most fundamental concepts in investigative analysis, the five W’s
(who,what,where,when, and why). Views in our system are highly correlated, and each represents one of the W’s.
With this approach, an investigator can interactively explore terrorist activities efficiently and discover reasons of
attacks (why) by identifying patterns temporally (when), geo-spatially (where), between multiple terrorist groups
(who), and across different methods or modes of attacks (what). By coupling a global perspective with the details
gleaned from asking these five questions, the system allows analysts to think both tactically and strategically.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Line and Curve Genera-
tion
1. Introduction
The war on terror has taken center stage since the 9/11 at-
tacks. With the establishment of the Department of Home-
land Security and corresponding international efforts, more
analysts are participating in the investigation of world-wide
terrorist activity. These analysts seek to reveal the patterns
of activities of different terrorist groups and the relationships
among them. To make their investigations complete, analysts
need to uncover the facts of terrorist events and incorporate
them into a broader context. However, until recently, most
reports on terrorism have been scattered across different data
sources, making it difficult to build a cohesive picture.
The Global Terrorism Database (GTD) project has con-
solidated both domestic and international terrorist activities
between 1970 and 1997. With the wealth of data represented
by the GTD, the challenge now becomes to understand and
uncover important patterns and relationships. Unfortunately,
analysts until now have had limited tools to help build hy-
potheses and identify trends, limiting the speed of under-
standing this important information.
We present an interactive visual analytics system to ex-
plore the GTD. Our system is designed around depicting one
of the most fundamental concepts in investigative analysis,
the five W’s (who, what, where, when, and why). Four coor-
dinated views are built to depict each of the first four W’s
(Figure 1), while the exploratory relation-probing nature of
the system allows the analyst to build her own why out of
the information at hand. We have informally evaluated this
approach by presenting our system to three groups of expert
investigative analysts with backgrounds in criminology and
law enforcement. The results of this evaluation show that the
system can assist the analyst in building an integrated under-
standing of terrorist activities.
The system presented in this paper represents significant
improvements over existing practice in the following ways:
• It provides visual analysis of the five W’s, which supports
existing investigative thinking.
• It supports both strategic analysis of high-level patterns
and tactical analysis of individual events.
• It facilitates communication of investigative findings and
hypotheses among analysts.
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
2 paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism
Figure 1: This is the overview of the entire system, including the map view (top right), temporal view (bottom right), entity view
(top left) and activities panel (middle left).
2. Related Works
There is an extensive literature devoted to the study and anal-
ysis of terrorism. These studies mostly focus on presenting
the results of their analyses using qualitative descriptions or
simple graphs (such as histograms or line graphs over time)
to show trends of one or two variables [GLM07]. In the case
of the Global Terrorism Database, which contains more than
one hundred dimensions, these descriptions and graphs sim-
ply do not sufficiently communicate the complex relation-
ships among all the variables and, in particular, their detailed
spatial relations over time. In this situation, it is difficult for
the analyst to identify global patterns and trends or to formu-
late hypotheses and perform high level strategic reasoning.
The use of exploratory visual analytics concepts to un-
derstand complex relationships in terrorism activities is still
in its infancy. The research up to this point can be divided
into two groups: social network and geo-temporal visual-
izations. Social network visualization and analysis is a well
established area in both the sociology [Fre00] and visual-
ization communities [SMER06], but few systems have been
applied to understanding large amounts of terrorist activi-
ties. Shen et al. [SMER06] developed OntoVis, which uti-
lized an ontology graph to visualize large heterogeneous net-
works and applied it to depict relationships between terrorist
groups. Perer and Schneiderman [Per06] analyzed the GTD
in their SocialAction system and could display relationships
between terrorist groups and/or countries. On the other hand,
although geo-temporal visualization is also a well estab-
lished area of research, particularly in the field of geograph-
ical information systems, there has been little application of
this approach to terrorism data. In fact, the only system that
we’re aware of that has been used directly in understand-
ing terrorist activities by depicting temporal, geospatial, and
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism 3
multivariate aspects of terrorism was developed by Guo et
al. [GLM07], which does not focus on the relationships be-
tween individual entities.
Surprisingly, we have found very few comprehensive sys-
tems that attempt to incorporate both the social and the geo-
temporal aspects of terrorist activities. A framework pro-
posed by Zhu and Chen in a poster [Zhu07] demonstrated
a structure for automatically identifying who, when, what,
and where in a salient story regarding terrorist events. While
their framework concentrates on extraction of information
from unstructured text, our system uses existing terrorism
data and focuses on the interactive exploration and analysis
of the relationships within the data.
3. Global Terrorism Database
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has as
a primary mission preventing terrorist attacks within the
United States and reducing the vulnerability of the United
States to terrorism. With support from the DHS, a team of
researchers at the National Consortium for the Study of Ter-
rorism and Responses to Terrorism (START) has developed
a new database designed to help analysts, practitioners, and
policy-makers achieve DHS’s mission while also providing
a resource for the other investigative analysts, such as re-
porters.
The Global Terrorism Database, or GTD, provides de-
tailed information on terrorist events that have occurred all
around the world since 1970, including all domestic cases
(e.g., an American attacking a target within the United
States, or a Frenchmen attacking a target in France) as well
as international events (where the perpetrator attacks a target
in a foreign country, as with the 9/11 attacks).
Compiled by a team of social scientists, the data have
been assembled to allow for systematic analyses of trends
in terrorist activity over time, across places, and by differ-
ent terrorist organizations. While the world may face unique
terrorist threats today, analysts can learn a great deal about
today’s threats by exploring the behaviors of terrorist groups
in the distant and recent past and the impacts that these ac-
tors, and the events they perpetrated, have had. The GTD is
an essential tool to allow for such exploration.
The GTD began in 2001 when Gary LaFree and Laura
Dugan at the University of Maryland obtained a large col-
lection of data originally collected by the Pinkerton Global
Intelligence Services (PGIS). From 1970 to 1997, Pinker-
ton trained researchers to identify and record terrorism inci-
dents from wire services, government reports, and major in-
ternational newspapers. With the launch of START in 2005,
funds were made available to conduct validity and reliability
checks of the existing PGIS data, and starting in April 2006,
in partnership with the Center for Terrorism and Intelligence
Studies (CETIS), collection on data for events post-1997 be-
gan. By September 2008 the new data will be systematically
integrated with the original data to form a single source of
information on terrorist attacks, from 1970 to 2007.
The current database (GTD 1.0) has over 60,000 incidents
and 119 dimensions. Over 2000 terrorist groups (who) have
been recorded in this database, connected with events on a
27-year time line from 1970 to 1997 (when). We use a set of
well-defined categorical dimensions as the what in our sys-
tem. For instance, we list attack type, target type and weapon
type in the what view, so that the tactical incident can be an-
alyzed from different aspects. Therefore, by mapping each
individual incident to its location (where) and showing the
rest of the W’s, we offer a complete, highly interactive sys-
tem to assist analysts in researching this critically important
dataset (or any other similarly structured data).
4. Investigative Analysts
Since the first public release of the GTD in May 2007, there
have been more than 110,000 hits to the web-based GTD in-
terface. Generally speaking there are three types of users: the
general public, investigative analysts, and terrorism experts
and researchers, including counter-terrorism practitioners.
These three groups of users correspond to three levels of
use of the GTD in terms of sophistication and depth. The
general public represents users who are largely unaware of
historic global terrorist activities; investigative analysts are
those with some knowledge of terrorist activities; and terror-
ism experts and researchers have in-depth knowledge of the
groups and events, especially in the areas of their expertise.
Surprisingly, most queries to START about the GTD comes
from investigative analysts who are interested in identifying
terrorist events and finding relationships or correlations be-
tween terrorist activities that are not previously known. The
typical task for an investigative analyst could be to identify
patterns of terrorist activities in a specific country over some
time, to discover common targets of terrorist groups, or to
find out if attacks occur near each other and around the same
time, indicating the possibility of collaboration or coordina-
tion among the responsible groups. It is with the needs of in-
vestigative analysts in mind that we design our system. The
aim is to create the system such that it is intuitive for an-
alysts and yet powerful enough to support the investigative
process by answering the five W’s. In this way and because
its analysis can be both general and highly detailed, it can
also support the needs of expert users and researchers.
5. System Overview
In order to allow investigative analysts to freely explore ter-
rorist activities and discover new trends and relationships,
our system uses a different pane to depict each of the W’s in
a highly coordinated manner such that interaction with one
of the panes will immediately affect the views and results of
the others. This multi-view approach is flexible in nature and
allows an analyst to inject knowledge of any of the four W’s
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
4 paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism
in any order. As more information is given to the system,
it produces more precise and detailed the results become, al-
lowing the analyst to reduce irrelevant information and focus
on the desired incidents or relationships.
To support the interaction of where, we create a zoomable
map view that locates each terrorist incident globally. An in-
teractive ThemeRiver [HHWN02] shows the trend of a user-
chosen variable over time, depicting when. A list of check-
boxes organized by dimensions allows the user to select the
attributes of the incidents (what), and an updating panel de-
tails the terrorist groups that are of interest to the analyst
(who). We further create a shoebox pane that serves as a con-
tainer for evidence collection. Terrorist groups in the shoe-
box can be selected and compared to identify similar trends
and patterns. Lastly, a simple tabular pane displays the orig-
inal incident record in plain text, which allows the analyst to
drill down to the details of each incident at any time during
the investigation.
Where: Map View
Maps are arguably one of the easiest and most intuitive vi-
sualizations to understand [Pla05], so the where view is the
centerpiece of our system to visualize entities and their re-
lationships. Since the majority of the incidents in the GTD
contain geographical information of varying degrees of ac-
curacy, our map is zoomable and pan-able to enable inves-
tigation at any granularity. By placing each incident on the
map, detailed geographic relationships and patterns immedi-
ately become apparent. Figure 3 shows the attacks in Egypt
are all along the Nile River, while most attacks in northern
Africa take took place along the coast of the Mediterranean
Sea. The incidents can be colored based on categorical di-
mensions of the data such as attack method or weapon type
(Figure 3) that can easily reveal patterns based on locations
and trends over time. Display of numerical data such as num-
ber of casualties is shown using transparent circles (Figure
4), with the size of the circle corresponding to the value for
each incident. In this way multiple relations with precise ge-
ographic patterns and distributions over time can be built up
and understood.
One important feature of the map view is depicting the
temporal sequence of activities of the terrorist groups by
connecting the incidents with edges (Figure 4). Although
the obvious use of this visualization is understanding the
sequence in which incidents occur, the greatest benefit of
connecting the incidents is to give a shape to each terror-
ist group. By relying on humans’ ability to detect and com-
pare different shapes, this visualization makes comparing
between different groups intuitive. Furthermore, as shown
in the evaluation section (section 7.2), using these kind of
shapes makes detecting certain errors and outliers straight-
forward and obvious (Figure 4).
Figure 3:Global distribution of incidents are shown colored
by attack type. The locations of the incidents show that at-
tacks in North Africa occur largely along the coast and the
Nile River.
Figure 4: FARC’s (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colom-
bia) activities are connected by lines to indicate the temporal
sequence of events. The yellow circles represent the number
of casualties per incident. The overall shape indicates that
FARC is mainly a domestic terrorist group, but has one sig-
nificant geographical outlier.
When: Temporal View
Understanding temporal patterns and trends in terrorist ac-
tivities is the when aspect of an investigation. Our method
for interacting with time, based on ThemeRiver [HHWN02],
shows time in relation to categorical dimensions in the ter-
rorist events. The streams in our ThemeRiver correspond to
values in a categorical dimension that is interactively se-
lected by the analyst. The ThemeRiver reveals global tem-
poral trends and patterns, as well as the relative growth and
decline among the streams over time, making it much more
knowledge-rich than simple time slider. As an example, Fig-
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism 5
Figure 2: Regional ThemeRiver: this view contains both dimensional information and temporal information, indicating global
terrorism trends from 1971 to 1992. Here it shows regional distributions, as labeled.
ure 2 shows the overall increase of terrorism around the
world as well as the growth of terrorism in each of the con-
tinents. Specifically, the rise of terrorism in Latin America
(brown) in the early 80s is evident, as is the rapid growth of
activities in Asia in the late 80s (light blue).
What: Activities Panel
To help organize over a hundred dimensions in the GTD
dataset, we use a panel with tabs that correspond directly
to the categorical dimensions in the data. Each tab repre-
sents a dimension, and the possible values for the dimen-
sions are shown in different colors and unique labels in the
form of checkboxes (Figure 5). The combination of these
checkboxes denotes thewhat aspect of the terrorist incidents.
Interacting with these categories by checking/un-checking
corresponding checkboxes in the activity panel allows the
analyst to filter and identify terrorist events that fulfill any
investigative criteria. It is important to note that the colors
shown in the activities panel are the same as the colors in the
ThemeRiver as well as the map view and can therefore be
used as a color legend for the entire view.
Figure 5: Activities Panel: This is an interactive filtering
panel, which uses dimensions in the GTD to filter and color
events in the other views.
Who: Entity View
We use a combination of three panels to enable the analyst
to find any targeted terrorist groups among more than two
thousand in the GTD. An alphabetical list of the groups al-
lows the analyst to start the investigation by searching on
specific names (Figure 6(left)). A correlated view connects
to the map view, the ThemeRiver, and the activities panel in
a way that filters the terrorist groups by where, when, and
what. Lastly, we offer a shoebox as a container for collect-
ing terrorist groups that are of interest to the analyst (Fig-
ure 6(right)). An individual terrorist group is inserted or re-
moved from the shoebox manually, allowing the analyst to
form and test hypotheses.
Figure 6: Entity view: The Terrorist Name tab (left) lists
2404 terrorist groups extracted from the GTD, while the In-
termediate Results tab shows suggestions for possible terror-
ist groups. The Shoebox (right) is a container for collections
of user-selected terrorist groups, providing the user an easy
way to compare different terrorist groups.
6. Scenarios
To show the utility of our system, we identified a few scenar-
ios in collaboration with the START center that demonstrate
possible ways in which the system can be employed. Our
focus in these scenarios is not only on the goals of the inves-
tigation, but also on the paths which an analyst might take to
arrive at the conclusions. In both scenarios described below,
we demonstrate that an analyst can begin to deduce the why
of the attacks by identifying the other four other W’s.
6.1. Linking Tactical Incidents and Global Strategy
In this scenario, an analyst begins by examining one of the
most talked-about groups in recent years, Hizballah (some-
times spelled as Hizbollah/Hezbollah/Hizbullah), by select-
ing it from the entity view (who). It is widely known that
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
6 paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism
Hizballah is an Islamic political and paramilitary organiza-
tion based in Lebanon that has recently been in conflict with
Israel. Based on their reputation, one might reason that the
activities carried out by Hizballah would concentrate in the
Middle East. However, upon highlighting Hizballah in the
entity view, it becomes immediately evident that Hizballah’s
terrorist activity between 1979 and 1997 is not limited to a
specific region (Figure 7). A closer inspection in the map
view (where) shows that out of the 200 attacks by Hizbal-
lah, the majority of the incidents take place within Lebanon,
but it is clear that they do indeed have a global strategy of
operation in both Europe and South America.
Figure 7: In this example, edges indicate that Hizballah is
an active international terrorist group, with a wide attack
range. The highlighted city illustrates a significant outlier in
Argentina in 1994.
One obvious outlier in the pattern of incidents is the ma-
jor attack in Argentina in 1994 for which Hizballah claimed
responsibility. Double-clicking on that incident in the map
view shows that the attack was on a Jewish community cen-
ter in Buenos Aires that resulted in 96 deaths and more than
250 injuries. Although inconclusive, this incident suggests
that Hizballah’s attacks are not based on their geographical
locations, but influenced instead by the religious beliefs of
its targets (why).
Examining the timeline (when) also reveals a change in
Hizballah’s attack pattern over time (Figure 8). It appears
that between 1984 and 1988, Hizballah’s primary attack
method (what) was kidnapping. Starting in 1989, its strategy
changed to a mix of bombing and facility attack. Finally, fa-
cility attack became the predominant attack method in the
early to mid 90s, while the number of bombings decreased
and eventually stopped.
The investigation in this scenario included all four of the
W’s and ended in a limited but plausible hypothesis of why
Hizballah conducted terrorism around the world. It uncov-
ers both tactical decisions and methods of the Hizballah’s
Figure 8: This image depicts changes in Hizballah’s attack
methods over the last 17 years, which shifted from kidnap-
pings to a mix of bombings and facility attacks, to almost
entirely facility attacks. Note that the GTD does not contain
data for the year 1993 [LD07].
attacks, but also makes clear the trend and pattern of their
global operations.
6.2. Discovering Unexpected Patterns
By examining the overview shown in Figure 1, we can see
that a great deal of terrorist attacks took place in the Philip-
pines. Zooming into that specific region and selecting the
entire country in the map view (what) lists all the terror-
ist groups active between 1970 and 1997. A quick search
in the entity view (who) shows that the NPA (New People’s
Army) is one of the most active groups in the region (Fig-
ure 9). Highlighting NPA reveals that although active, NPA
is strictly domestic and has never performed activities out-
side of the Philippines.
Figure 9: This image indicates that the NPA was an active
domestic terrorist group that was responsible for more than
a thousand incidents within the Philippines.
An examination of the ThemeRiver (Figure 10), however,
shows an interesting temporal pattern in NPA’s activities. It
appears that while NPA was indeed active during the ’80s, it
stopped operating entirely in 1992. This unexpected tempo-
ral behavior, unfortunately, cannot be explained using only
the data within the GTD. In order to find out what hap-
pened in 1992 in the Philippines (why), we turn to newspa-
per archives and found out that in 1992 Fidel Ramos became
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism 7
the twelfth president of the Philippines, and immediately of-
fered peace treaties to various terrorist groups including the
NPA [She92]. Although it is unclear whether this event is
directly linked to the diminished activities of NPA, it forms
the basis for a plausible hypothesis for further investigation.
This shows how evidence gained from the GTD visual anal-
ysis can provide a specific basis for continued investigations
using open source or other data.
Figure 10: This result shows changes in the NPA’s attack
frequency during the time period of the dataset. Though it
was very active in the late ’80s, it suddenly disappeared in
1992.
7. User Evaluation
We asked three groups of experts in law enforcement and
criminology to evaluate our system. Our experts are from the
criminology department at the University of Maryland, the
National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB), and the Drug En-
forcement Administraion (DEA). The evaluation was con-
ducted informally. First we presented our system by demon-
strating the investigative scenarios described in the previous
section. Then the experts were given some time to inter-
actively explore the system and the GTD. Finally, we con-
cluded the evaluation by asking them to give feedback and
comments. All these experts gave consent to have their com-
ments and affiliations published in this paper.
7.1. The Five W’s (Who, Where, When, What, Why)
At the heart of our system is the integration of the five W’s
in a comprehensive and cohesive manner. This design is val-
idated by one of our expert evaluators, who serves as a spe-
cial agent in the NICB. He said, “The five W’s you are using
here are exactly similar to what we have in police reports.
It is critically important for us to understand individual in-
cidents from different aspects, like the who, where, when,
what, why.” Also, according to GTD data designers at Uni-
versity of Maryland, “In particular, your system presents
users with an efficient means to access multiple dimensions
of terrorist event data simultaneously. True to the goals of the
project, it allows users to see where specific terrorist groups
were operating during defined time periods and to discern
the nature of the weapons and attacks that the groups en-
gaged in. As such, it provides a streamlined mechanism for
helping users to identify behavioral trends among terrorist
groups over time. Traditionally, users working with the nu-
meric version of the GTD would have to sort through tens of
thousands of rows of data to come up with information on
cases that meet specific criteria. This tool greatly facilitates
this effort.”
7.2. Tactical vs. Strategic Analysis
Tactical analysis is traditionally considered to be the pursuit
of short term analytical goals using resources at hand, while
strategy is the longer-term pursuit to understand a group or
a situation at a higher level. Our experts from law enforce-
ment confess that the large numbers and density of reports
they receive on a daily basis force them to think tactically,
rather than strategically. They agree that an exploratory vi-
sual analytics system could help to reduce the amount of
noise they have to sift through in order to see the broader pic-
ture and hone in on the suspicious outliers. Two experts ex-
plicitly pointed out that it has become more and more impor-
tant for tools to help analysts take a step back from tactical
analysis to strategic analysis. They agreed that our tool will
assist this analytical pattern by visually providing a global
pattern as well as details on demand. According to the law
enforcement analyst from the DEA, both outliers and global
patterns are critical to analysis. “It is very useful to directly
mark those targets with their strategic shapes. Your system
could benefit the Federal government’s interest in investigat-
ing both local terrorist groups and their attempts to develop
ties with other international groups.”
7.3. Reducing Communication Gaps
Conveying knowledge and investigative results visually can
drastically reduce the amount of effort spent on communi-
cation and reduce ambiguity. Since our system is designed
to display the five W’s, it can present a complete and co-
herent picture of the current state of an analytical process.
According to the analyst from NICB, the current practice of
using text-based reports for sharing insights and hypotheses
found during an investigation process tends to be error-prone
and time-consuming. “[Your system] will greatly shorten the
catch-up time between police shifts and guide them to focus
more on things that they are interested in.”
Along the same lines, the expert in criminology praised
our system for its intuitiveness and ease of use. Since the
GTD is a large and complex dataset containing tens of thou-
sands of records with over a hundred dimensions, it has been
difficult for non-experts in terrorism investigation to utilize
this wealth of data. With a fully interactive and exploratory
interface, our system effectively shortens the distance be-
tween terrorism experts who prepare and collect the data
and the users of varying levels of expertise and backgrounds
who seek to identify patterns and trends in terrorist activities
around the world.
8. Discussion
Encouragingly, the experts from law enforcement who par-
ticipated in our evaluation were eager to use our system for
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.
8 paper ID 1185 / Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism
their own purposes. During the evaluation, both of these an-
alysts were already picturing their own data visualized in
our system. They both consider the structure and nature of
the GTD to be very similar to the financial and criminal
reports that they investigate, and could see the tool having
an immediate impact on multiple aspects of their day-to-day
jobs, including tactical analysis of incidents, strategic think-
ing about global trends and patterns, and communication and
reporting of their investigative findings with peers and supe-
riors.
More importantly, they foresee an unexpected use of the
system in predicting future trends and activities. Our sys-
tem’s ability to depict temporal trends clearly in relation to
both geographical and other patterns suggests possible fu-
ture directions of events. Although the predictive capability
of the system is not one that we had considered, we are very
excited about its promise and potential benefits in the field of
law enforcement. Based on these positive responses, we plan
to place our system in the hands of these and other experts
for continued use and evaluation.
The only major criticism of our system concerns the vi-
sual representation of overlapping incidents and overplotted
lines in the map view. For instance, when multiple events oc-
cur in the same city or region, it is not easy to see the number
of events that overlap each other (e.g., there are more than
700 incidents in Beirut alone). This may lead the user to un-
derestimate the degree to which a specific location has been
attacked. Similarly, with overplotted lines in a condensed re-
gion, the shape of the activities and their temporal relation-
ships can easily be lost. We are investigating new visual rep-
resentations that may alleviate these issues.
9. Conclusion
We present a visual analytics system for exploring terror-
ist activities in the Global Terrorism Database. We employ
a coordinated multi-view approach with high interaction to
depict the five W’s (who, what, when, where, and why) of in-
vestigative analysis. With our tool, analysts can both explore
tactical incidents and identify strategic patterns and trends. It
can also reduce ambiguity and effort in communicating the
results of analysis.
References
[Fre00] FREEMAN L. C.: Visualizing social networks.
Journal of Social Structure 1 (2000).
[GLM07] GUO D., LIAO K., MORGAN M.: Visualizing
patterns in a global terrorism incident database. Environ-
ment and Planning B: Planning and Design 34, 1 (2007),
767–784.
[HHWN02] HAVRE S., HETZLER E., WHITNEY P.,
NOWELL L.: Themeriver: Visualizing thematic changes
in large document collections. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics 8, 1 (2002), 9–20.
[LD07] LAFREE G., DUGAN L.: Introducing the global
terrorism database. Terrorism and Political Violence 19, 2
(2007), 181–204.
[Per06] PERER A.; SHNEIDERMAN B.: Balancing sys-
tematic and flexible exploration of social networks. Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 5
(Sept.-Oct. 2006), 693–700.
[Pla05] PLAISANT C.: Information visualization and the
challenge of universal usability. In Exploring Geovisual-
ization (2005), Elsevier.
[She92] SHENON P.: For filipino new dealer, a hard road
to recovery. New York Times, 1992.
[SMER06] SHEN Z., MA K.-L., ELIASSI-RAD T.: Vi-
sual analysis of large heterogeneous social networks by
semantic and structural abstraction. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 6 (2006), 1427–
1439.
[Zhu07] ZHU WEIZHONG; CHEN C.: Visual analysis
of terrorism events extracted from the public knowl-
edge bases. Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics (2007).
submitted to EUROGRAPHICS 2008.

