TSINGHUA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
I S S N l l 1 0 0 7 - 0 2 1 4 l l 0 1 / 1 2 l l p p 1 - 1 6
Volume 17, Number 4, August 2012
RiskVA: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks
Analysis?
Xiaoyu Wang, Dong Jeong, Remco Chang and William Ribarsky
Charlotte Visualization Center, UNC Charlotte, Charlotte, USA, 28223
Abstract: Consumer credit risk analysis plays a significant role in stabilizing a bank’s investments and in maximizing
its profits. As a large financial institution, Bank of America relies on effective risk analyses to minimize the net credit
loss resulting from its credit products (e.g. mortgage and credit card loans). Due to the size and complexity of the
data involved in this process, analysts are facing challenges in monitoring the data, comparing its geospatial and
temporal patterns, and developing appropriate strategies based on the correlation from multiple analysis perspec-
tives. To address these challenges, we present RiskVA, an interactive visual analytics system that is tailored to
support credit risk analysis. RiskVA provides interactive data exploration and correlation, and visually assists them
in depicting market fluctuations and temporal trends of the targeted credit product. When evaluated by analysts
from Bank of America, RiskVA was appreciated for its effectiveness in facilitating the bank’s risk management.
Key words: Risk management, Visual analytics
Introduction
Credit risk management, in general, refers to the pro-
cess in which the investors assess the risk of loss aris-
ing from a borrower who does not make payments as
promised [3]. For most banks and financial institutions,
loans and credit products are the largest and most obvi-
ous source of risk. In order for a bank to profit from
a large consumer base, it must invest in credit prod-
ucts (e.g. credit cards, mortgages) that are reasonable
to customers. However, the bank must strike a balance
between the investments and the substantial amount of
capital in its reserve; so that investments would be prof-
itable yet sustain the bank’s financial stability.
Therefore, the assessment of credit risk is crucial for
banks to position themselves to profit through balancing
credit investments and returns;it is also critical for the
stability of an entire financial market. Inadequate risk
Received: ; Accepted:
? To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: xwang25@uncc.edu Tel: 01+7046877741
management can result in severe consequences for com-
panies as well as individuals. As shown in their study
of the correlations between recessions and banking cri-
sis, Bloom et al.[4] suggested that the credit investment
strategies were directly associated with the stability of
the entire financial market; an unexpected credit crunch
would lead to the complete disarray of the financial mar-
kets. For example, the loose credit risk management of
financial firms was determined to be one of the factors
that triggered the recession in 2008.
As a large institution, Bank of America (BOA) con-
stantly faces the challenge of managing its credit risk.
Their stability relies on the effective risk analyses to
minimize the net credit loss resulted from its credit
products, and to determine profitable market strategies.
Given BOA’s wide range of credit investments, how-
ever, analyzing risk in such diversified portfolio has be-
come an overwhelming process. This demands that ana-
lysts evaluate credit risks both temporally (i.e. identify-
ing market turning points before and after the recession)
and across credit markets (e.g. comparing product per-
formances in major cities). Exacerbating this challenge
2 Tsinghua Science and Technology, August 2012, 15(4): 000-000
is the increasing size and complexity of the collected
credit data that each analyst needs to examine. This
places an extra burden on each individual analysis pro-
cess in terms of the efforts needed to acquire the most
appropriate information. This is exacerbated further by
the need to gather information from heterogeneous data
sources and bring it into a common picture. Current
analytical tools are not designed specifically to address
these challenges and can’t help analysts to comprehend
the trends and patterns of markets from the necessary
analytical perspectives.
To alleviating these challenges, we formed a research
partnership with Bank of America to investigate novel
analysis technologies. One of our first actions under
this partnership was to observe and characterize the an-
alysts’ analytical workflow. Such domain characteriza-
tion granted us the opportunity to closely identify the
key perspectives in risk analysis, and helped us gain in-
sights on the design elements that are needed.
In this paper, we present RiskVA, an interactive vi-
sual analytics system that is tailored to support credit
risk analysis. RiskVA addresses the aforementioned
challenges by supporting interactive data exploration
and information correlation over a large corpus of credit
data. It aids the analysts in depicting and comparing
the performance of the credit products via visually re-
vealing market fluctuations and temporal trends of the
targeted credit products. RiskVA further supports indi-
vidual analysis workflow and allows the analysts to cus-
tomize the visual interface based on their preferences.
To evaluate the efficacy of the system, we have con-
ducted expert evaluations with analysts from BOA. We
found that most analysts considered RiskVA to be use-
ful and complimentary to their analysis needs. We fur-
ther identified analysis scenarios for which our system
could provide analysts with insights to develop appro-
priate risk management strategies. Given these results,
this work presents substantial qualitative advances over
current practices in consumer risk analysis.
• It provides a visual exploratory environment to
handle scalable, multi-channel risk-related data
over any given periods of time.
• It provides highly coordinated interactive visual-
izations to enhance both tactical and strategic anal-
yses that are essential in depicting emerging risks.
• It provides customizable workspaces that support
the individual analyst’s analysis routines.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section 1 characterizes the analysis processes and de-
scribes our targeted users. Section 2 provides more de-
tails about the limitations of current analysis practices.
Section 3 presents RiskVA, and Section 4 provides sev-
eral scenarios in which RiskVA can facilitate. Section 5
shows our evaluation with domain analysts and discus-
sions. We conclude the paper in Section 6.
1 Domain Characterization: Credit Risk
Analysis and its Challenges
In this section, we describe the current practice in credit
risk analysis. By discussing these in detail, we intend
to shed light on the characteristic of existing challenges
and how an interactive visual analytics system can pro-
vide substantial improvements in risk management.
The importance of credit risk analysis, as part of fi-
nancial risk analysis, originates from the New Basel
Capital Accord. Credit risk analysis generally referred
to the process of establishing standards for investors
and counterparties, assessing the portfolios of the ex-
isting credit products, and preventing deterioration in
the credit standing of a bank’s counterparties[3]. Fi-
nancial companies typically use risk models to evalu-
ate the insolvency risk caused by credits that enter into
default. The tradition in consumer credit has been to
take performance data over a fixed time interval for a
sample of consumers. Then each consumer is ranked by
performance, where unsatisfactory performance is often
equated with being 60 or 90 days overdue with repay-
ments. This historical information is reviewed by risk
analysts and is then used to model internal risk strate-
gies based on the characteristics of each consumer. The
modeled strategy is then applied to new consumer to
determine whether they are above the cut-off level to be
accepted to open a line of credit.
Fig. 1 This is a typical risk analysis workflow observed and
summarized from risk analysts in BOA.
As shown in Fig. 1, the credit risk analyses workflow
are based on the following considerations:
• Requires for assessing the performance of credit
products. For example, if the net loss of a credit
product exceeds a certain threshold, the analysts
Xiaoyu Wang et al.: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks Analysis 3
need to evaluate the associated potential risk.
• Shifts in general credit investment strategy. For in-
stance, in the change of market focuses (i.e. fo-
cus shifts from high-end to mid-range consumers),
the existing credit products would need to be re-
evaluated in order to accommodate the changes.
• Optimization of the portfolio of consumers or mar-
kets: e.g. analysts need to minimize credit loss and
increase the product revenues. The analysts need
to operate under a sound credit-granting process.
Thus, it is obvious that the determination of the credit
risk relates to multiple intertwined factors. While a set
of SQL queries can be used to retrieve delinquency pat-
terns matching a limited set of existing hypotheses, in-
specting risky behaviors or hidden investment opportu-
nities are less straightforward. They are determined by
a dynamic analysis context influenced by various fac-
tors, such as the markets’ geospatial distributions, the
prior investment strategies, and the competitors’ behav-
iors. Hence, risk analysts often need to construct elab-
orated queries over multiple facets of a large body of
credit data, searching for certain statistical values that
indicates high risk. Manually correlating these informa-
tion channels is overwhelming: a single-focused analy-
sis that only analyze the known risks might the hidden
investment opportunity; whereas only retaining portfo-
lios with very low delinquency rates could harm their
relationships with clients or regulatory agencies.
Exacerbating this challenge is the increasing size and
complexity of the collected credit data that each analyst
needs to examine. Millions of detailed consumer inci-
dences are aggregated monthly to represent the market
behaviors. This includes information about the banks
and their competitors, the consumer demographics, and
the third party credit ratings. Thus, to comprehend the
trends and patterns of a market and identify the invest-
ment opportunities, risk analysts are responsible for de-
veloping methods to utilize that large data corpus and
predict the likelihood that a client who borrows money
from a financial institution will default or fall behind on
a loan payment. This places an extra burden on the anal-
ysis process in terms of the efforts needed to acquire the
most appropriate information. At present, analysts do
not have the capability to investigate all the activities,
not to mention conducting thorough temporal analyses.
In summary, credit risk analysis is an important yet
challenging process, due to the increasing size and com-
plexity of the data. Effective analysis tools are needed
to address these challenges. Such tools must be tailored
to specific analysis practices based upon the nature of
the credit data. The tools must also enable comprehen-
sive analysis of a large body of data to help verify hy-
potheses as well as allow discovery of hidden features.
2 Related Work
In recent years the idea of using visualization to support
financial analysis has gained a lot of interest. The fore-
front of visual analysis within the financial market can
be categorized in several main sectors, namely temporal
analysis, market analysis, and investment analysis. For
temporal analysis, several efforts have previously inves-
tigated representing and analyzing changes in financial
data[1,2,8]. Particularly, recent work by Ziegler et al.[20]
presented useful clustering techniques to help visualize
the temporal financial changes.
To support market analysis, Keim et al.[9] have pre-
sented pixel-based visualization techniques showing the
performance of individual stocks in high detail. In
addition, the tree-map-based Map of the Market by
Wattenberg[17] had introduced an effective way to ex-
amine and compare market and stock performances.
Finally, much research emphasized the integration of
visualizations and mathematics in maximizing invest-
ment profits[11,16]. A representative work by Maciejew-
ski et al.[13], combines the Winner’s and Loser’s Curse
to reach optimal investment decisions.
Given the complexity of aforementioned risk analy-
sis, these individual systems are not particularly suited
for depicting multidimensional data on their own. How-
ever, these visualizations can be integrated into systems
handling multidimensional data by using multiple co-
ordinated views[12] in conjunction with highly interac-
tive exploratory techniques. Systems for integrating
large data source, such as JigSaw[15] PatentVis[10] and
IRSV[19], enhance analysis tasks by providing an inte-
grated visual environments for direct data manipulation.
Moreover, another significant aspect in consumer risk
analysis is its time-critical nature, which requires a con-
cise yet dynamic visual interface to effectively perfor-
mance both tactical and strategic analyses on emerg-
ing risks. Examples for systems that intend to address
such analysis are GTDVis[18] and WireVis[7]. Compared
to GTDVis, which reveals global terrorist attacks pat-
terns based on individual attributes, our system empha-
sizes revealing the combined impacts to the credit mar-
4 Tsinghua Science and Technology, August 2012, 15(4): 000-000
Fig. 2 This is an overview of RiskVA, including the Entity Heatmap view (A), the Product Comparison view (B) and the Trend
Analysis view (C). Here, analysts examine the 30-day delinquency rate (late payment) in Market C across a range of consumers.
kets based on associating multi-channel risk informa-
tion. While both RiskVA and WireVis present concise
visualizations for large financial datasets, RiskVA also
supports a customization mechanism to support dynam-
ically rule generation and workspaces creation.
In the following sections, we detail the challenges
of the current risk analysis process, and describe our
visual analytics system, which is designed to address
these challenges by encoding the essential analyses into
a cohesive visual analysis environment.
3 Identifying Analytical Requirements in
Risk Analysis Processes
To design a visual analytics system that is tailored to the
risk analytical workflow in Bank of America, we es-
tablished a long-term collaboration with its Consumer
Credit Risk Solution divisions and grounded our inves-
tigation on a field study conducted within the bank.
During the design phase, we communicated with an-
alysts from this division on their current practices as
well as their needs for good analysis of consumer credit
risks. We carried out multiple interviews and discus-
sions to observe the day-to-day operations performed
by the team. The interviewees held a broad range of
positions, including analysts who focused on analyzing
credit products and risk managers who were in charge
of business plans and management strategies.
The interview data collected was used to characterize
the task activities, and further used to develop the de-
sign requirements for a visual analytics system. Inter-
views with members from this team revealed their ana-
lytical needs, including fusing multiple streams of data,
retrieving information for context-dependent tasks, and
analyzing the findings. In general, our user group con-
stantly needs to respond to market changes and conduct
analyses involving the assessment of asset quality, the
adequacy of provisions and reserves, and the balance of
delinquency and investment.
As specified in Fig. 1, the analytical tasks of con-
ducting risk analysis often include requirement specifi-
cation, data aggregation, information organization and
correlation, and result sharing. To analyze risk of a
credit product, an analyst often starts by gathering rel-
evant content from multiple data sources for a compre-
hensive view of that product. This aggregated dataset
not only includes BOA’s own data, such as the delin-
quency (late-payment) rating for a product, but also data
from credit rating agencies, such as credit scores. To
improve their own assessments of risk, the analysts then
filter this large collection of data and attempt to orga-
nize it in a clear and consistent manner to support the
awareness and sense-making process.
Tools, in this context, are considered as a means to
transform their hypotheses into desired task actions.
Currently, the risk analysts primarily use tools, like
SQL databases and Excel, to produce and communi-
cate analysis outcomes. In the process, their prior ex-
periences (i.e. knowledge of a potentially deteriorat-
ing credit product) are used, and further task actions are
taken in their analytical process. Although these ana-
lysts currently use a number of different tools, we found
Xiaoyu Wang et al.: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks Analysis 5
that they were lacking tools actually designed to support
their analysis workflows and helps them effectively per-
form necessary tasks.
Therefore, the goal of our system is to address these
challenges in accordance with the analytical require-
ments of the risk analysis team. A detailed character-
ization of these three challenges, as well as how they
are addressed in our system are described as follows.
3.1 Support the Identification of Emerging Risks
Consumer risk analysis requires analysts to ”know your
customers”. This includes knowing the performance of
credit products for the customers individually, in com-
mercial markets, and statistically. An important part of
knowing the customers is the assessment of their over-
all activities in terms of risk. Certain credit products
(e.g., loans as they are unsecured debt without collat-
eral) are inherently riskier. A financial institution must
know where and how its credit investment is being spent
in order to accurately assess the emerging risk. Yet, per-
forming this comprehensive risk analysis with the less
tailored tools is not easy. Specifically, the analysts re-
quire tools that focuses on the following aspects:
Market Analysis: The trends of a credit market have
significant influences on a bank’s investment strate-
gies. Typical markets are metropolitan areas where the
bank focuses its credit products. The analyses of these
markets concentrate more on the performance across
geospatial regions and the health of a credit market.
Temporal Analysis: The temporal changes of a
credit product is of great value in revealing the dete-
rioration rate of a credit product and its related net loss.
Risk analysts rely on this analysis to adjust their future
product investments. However, temporal analysis in ex-
isting tools is limited to a per-product basis. Having a
complete picture of the temporal changes of products
in all markets will help spotting abnormal investment
behaviors is very crucial to analysts.
Product-Comparison Analysis: The bank invests in
a wide range of credit products to maximize its invest-
ment profit. While current query-based analysis can
help follow the changes of a single product, it has dif-
ficulties in scale up the analysis. Given the diversity of
the products, tools that could assist in comparing the
behaviors of these products would be very significant.
In practice, the risk analysts often examine a mixture
of these analyses, such as depicting the trends in the
markets through both market and temporal analysis, or
examining a product’s impacts to the markets using both
market and product comparison analysis.
3.2 Support More Strategic than Tactical Analysis
Due to the burdensome necessity of analyzing multi-
channel credit information, analysts often think nar-
rowly about their investigative tasks. In particular, they
think in terms of known patterns or activities that have
been identified previously rather than in terms of what
the patterns in the data are revealing to them. In ad-
dition, credit analysis requires knowing the patterns of
market changes for individual clients as well as the en-
tire market. However, the analyses are often hindered
by the tools, the time, or the sufficiency of evidences in
revealing more broad nature of credit products.
Therefore, careful thought must be given to gather-
ing information to assist the analyst in providing ob-
jective, fully reasoned assessments backed by evidence
and avoiding inevitable pitfalls and biases. Hence, ana-
lytical tools must be able to help effectively sift through
noise and irrelevant data, explore a large body of credit
data, and combine information from multi-channel in-
formation sources into a strategic risk analysis.
4 RiskVA: A Visual Analytics System for
Analyzing Credit Risks
In response to these identified analytical requirements,
we designed RiskVA, an interactive visual analytics sys-
tem that helps domain analysts in depicting and compar-
ing the performance of the credit products through vi-
sually revealing market fluctuations and temporal trends
of the targeted credit products. Throughout the system
design and implementation phase, we maintained close
communication with the consumer credit risk solution
group and routinely showed our progress and received
feedback for our prototypes. In the following sections,
we first explain the data integration process that en-
ables RiskVA to effectively combine multiple informa-
tion channels, and then describe how each of the ana-
lytical requirements is depicted in our system. For pri-
vacy and proprietary reasons, details about the market
information, bank associations and consumer informa-
tion have all been anonymized in the following sections
and in the figures. Of course, when the bank analysts
use RiskVA, all this information is depicted.
4.1 Data Integration
At the heart of RiskVA is a data cube structure[14] that
is customized to handle the large-size and complex
credit data. Shown in Fig. 3, our design of a three-
6 Tsinghua Science and Technology, August 2012, 15(4): 000-000
Fig. 3 This is the system pipeline for RiskVA.
dimensional cube structure provided our collaborators
with a means to correlate multiple credit information.
On the conceptual level, our cube structure is spec-
ified to accommodate the risk analysts’ tasks, present-
ing the rules of the desired credit information. Particu-
larly, such rules are constructed around the key analy-
sis elements, including credit entity (e.g. FICO scores,
wealth level, market ID), temporal information, and
credit products (e.g. credit loans, mortgage).
The use of rules (e.g. market A & bank B & Time
C) in the cube structure can effectively help analysts to
navigate through a large body of high-dimensional data
and locate the desired information. For example, the
rules help answer question like, ”What’s the consumer
behavior in market M, with credit score below 690?”
In addition, rules can be recorded and reused in differ-
ent analysis scenarios, making it possible for RiskVA to
trace individual’s analytical process and share the out-
comes between analysts. The ease of creating rules pro-
vides the flexibility to customize the credit information
and fit it with individual analyst’s workflows. Finally,
the rules are an essential part in the constructions of the
visual representation. They inform the views to filter
unnecessary data elements and to present the analyst
with most relevant information. RiskVA further uses
these rules to coordinate and update the visualizations.
On the implementation level, this data cube follows
the previous work[14] on creating an effective structure
for slice-and-dice data from multiple aspects. As illus-
trated in Fig. 3, to optimize the memory usage, the cube
structure is disseminated into three parts: the meta-
cubes that stores the rules, the virtual-cubes, which
enable the comparison of credit products over a large
dataset, and the physical data cube that points to the ac-
tual credit data. Due to page limits, the details of the
implementation are beyond the scope of this paper.
4.2 Design Interactive Visualizations to Support the Identi-
fication of Emerging Risks
Given the complexity of the related information, no sin-
gle view could fulfill all the analytical requirements and
show all the necessary data. Therefore, RiskVA is de-
signed as system of coordinated views that would allow
the analysts to see different data, while being able to un-
derstand the connections between the views easily. In
particular, RiskVA encodes the three essential analyses
as described with a set of visualizations, each of which
correspond to facilitate market analysis, temporal anal-
ysis and comparison analysis, respectively.
4.2.1 Depict market behaviors with Entity Heatmap view
Fig. 4 This is the overview of the Entity Heatmap view.
Each Horizontal bar corresponds to a user-created rule.
RiskVA utilizes entity heatmap to display the statisti-
cal measurements associating investment markets (e.g.
population in the US West with credit scores less than
690) and credit products, as the former influences the
behaviors of the latter. As shown in Fig. 7, the heatmap
is based on a grid where columns are the timestamps,
and whose rows are rules that indicate the market per-
formance of different credit products. This design aims
to provide the analysts are direct sense of how the mar-
kets’ performances over time. At the intersection of a
particular column and row, the cell is color-coded with
a value derived from the combination of market/credit
card in that time-period. Such values are associated
with a particular credit performance indicator (e.g late-
payment rates). Depending on the choice of mathemat-
ical measurements (e.g., difference value granularity),
RiskVA enables the user to interactively apply various
color schemes (e.g., colors based on the min/max val-
ues) to depict some significant market trends, informing
the overall strategies about the targeted markets.
Using the heatmap view, risk analysts can now spot
the markets that perform worse than the others, relat-
ing to a given credit product. As shown in Fig. 4, this
view is also enhanced with user-configurable rules that
make it possible for analysts to visually compare pat-
Xiaoyu Wang et al.: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks Analysis 7
terns of product behaviors across different markets. For
example Fig. 7 (right) shows the comparison of overall
market fluctuations between two financial institutions in
the period of the 2007-2010. The heatmap view clearly
indicates the performance variation between two insti-
tutions, where the lower late-payment rate (blue) sug-
gests one has more stable products than the other. The
heatmap view is also highly interactive that enables in-
teractively selection, highlights, and sort of credit in-
formation. It further allows analysts to apply statisti-
cal analysis over a particular time period or investment
market for vertical and horizontal analysis.
Once general understandings about a particular credit
product are established, RiskVA further facilitate in
deepening the understanding of the impact of that credit
product to the market. It enables analysts to interac-
tively parameterize the heatmap view with more fo-
cused rules, and helps them depict the market impacts
with finer analytical context. In many cases, this en-
ables the dissemination of market trends into multiple
populations, revealing the strategies based on the risks
associated with each population. Fig. 7 (left) shows a
further analysis of the lesser-performing institution in-
dicates that the population with less than 620 score and
larger debt tends to pose higher risks than others.
4.2.2 Reveal temporal patterns by Trend Analysis view
Fig. 5 The overview of Trend analysis.
The ability to examine the stability of a credit market
over a period of time is of great value to the risk ana-
lysts, especially during a market turbulence. This can
help identify the most vulnerable consumer credit prod-
ucts, and depict the possible causes. Through manually
examining the changes of all the credit products prior
to that time frame, the analysts may eventually be able
to identify a weak product. However, current practices
still limit such crucial temporal analysis to a per-product
basis. RiskVA utilizes a coordinated interface to effec-
tively reveal these temporal patterns.
The trend analysis view (Fig. 5) is designed to sup-
port such analysis. It shows the overall temporal perfor-
mances of each credit product, and allows the analysts
to compare the stability of that product in different mar-
kets. The x-axis here shows the progression of time, and
the y-axis shows the performance of a product in a par-
ticular market. Such performance can be actual invest-
ment amount (e.g. total/average investment of mortgage
loan), or it can be the trend that is calculated to indicate
the stability of that product (i.e. the numerical differ-
ences between investment cycles).
In particular, each bubble in Fig. 2 (C) represents a
30-day credit late-payment rate; its transparency shows
the temporal trail for that market. The more opaque, the
closer that data is to the current time. If a market shares
less drastic changes, such as the green bubbles to the
left, the pattern resides in a more clustered group. How-
ever, if the market is like the one shown on the red dots
in Fig. 2 (C), as it is less grouped, this market is less
stable. Specifically, the late-payment ratings (i.e. the
dots) in that market changed drastically over the years.
To facilitate efficient interactions with the temporal
analysis, RiskVA enables quickly selection of a spe-
cific market or product by hovering the labels. Analysts
can further examine the details of a specific time period
and/or certain product/market, through interactively fil-
tering to the desired analysis items.
4.2.3 Compare products in Product-Comparison view
Fig. 6 This is the Product-Comparison View. Here shows
the comparison between in two invested consumer groups.
RiskVA uses an interactive bar chart view to present the
comparisons between credit products (Fig. 6). In this
view, the credit products are grouped and represented
in horizontal bars, which are directly associated with the
rule in the heatmap view. Different products are distin-
guished by the assigned colors. The length of each bar
corresponds to the actual investment values of that prod-
uct, and can be further customized based on aggregation
methods such as summation or average. By placing the
different products side-by-side, RiskVA enables direct
comparison between the performances of these invest-
ments for various populations. As shown above, the an-
alysts can clearly verify the well-being of the targeted
market, given the fact that the credit investments in that
8 Tsinghua Science and Technology, August 2012, 15(4): 000-000
market are distributed proportionally to the consumers’
credit scores (e.g. the bank invests more on consumers
with higher credit scores and less on consumers with
lower scores). To further examine the details of these
credit products, the analysts can mouse over each bar
and correlate it with the information in the heatmap.
4.3 Create Customizable Workspaces to Support individual
analysis routines
RiskVA further presents customizable workspaces to
support the diversified analysis goals. We define
workspace as a user-configurable combination of the
above three visualizations that provides a particular
analysis context. Much like a probe system[5], each
workspace builds upon the data cube structure and em-
powers the ability to depict multiple-channels informa-
tion simultaneously. For example, the analysts can ex-
amine and compare two market performances datasets
via different analysis contexts (see Fig. 7). In addi-
tion, the utilization of entity rules provides a founda-
tion for RiskVA to coordinate between the three views
and workspaces. Since the underlying structure for data
cubes (e.g. meta-cubes and virtual-cubes) is the same,
the information passing between these view represen-
tations becomes straightforward. RiskVA handles two
levels of coordination mechanism, within workspace
coordination and between view coordination. This
helps cross-comparison of individual products in differ-
ent analysis context (e.g. credit load performance in
US West v.s. US East ). If there are matching entities
(e.g. date, market, or rules), RiskVA can further link the
multiple workspaces using this information and provide
analysts a coherent understanding about the risks that
are embedded in different analysis contexts.
RiskVA also enables the analysts to have full control
of the creation of a workspace. Given their analytical
needs, analysts can directly branch off their analysis by
duplicating the existing workspaces or construct a com-
pletely new workspace with a different set of data. Such
a branching mechanism enables them to easily shift fo-
cuses while still maintaining the train of thought em-
bodied in the branching structure. In addition, RiskVA
also helps the analysts to customize their workspaces by
providing them the flexibility to combine and sequence
the analytical components to fit their own workflow (i.e.
remove or hide certain visualizations or apply specific
statistical analysis equations).
To help analysts maintain their train of thought and
resume or repeat their previous analysis processes,
RiskVA automatically records the history of the users’
workspace usages. It logs the time when a workspace
is created, branched off, and closed. It also records the
above system customizations (user’s view preferences
during a particular analysis). Thus, at any given time,
the analysts can use RiskVA to revisit their previous
workspaces and to continue their analyses.
5 Analysis Scenarios
Understanding the cause of market deterioration is a
key step for risk analysts to develop corresponding in-
vestment strategies. To conduct an unbiased risk analy-
sis, it is necessary for analysts to monitor and compare
credit products from both the competitors and their own.
Based on our discussions at BOA, we have observed
that the analysis of a market typically follows three
analysis stages, namely identifying risky markets, com-
paring product performance between banks, and identi-
fying potential causes for the fluctuation. The follow-
ing scenario was identified with the risk analysis team
at their regular strategy meeting. The agenda for this
meeting was to discuss the bank’s credit product per-
formances in several major investment markets using
RiskVA. As observers, we documented their analysis
processes and helped them become familiar with the
system. We also provided explanations about certain
features in our system during their exploration.
To pursue this scenario, as shown in Fig. 2, RiskVA
was initialized with credit data from year 2007 to 2010.
To depict the performances of individual markets, the
risk analysis team utilized the entity heatmap view to
check if any interesting fluctuation pattern could be
identified. The team found a set of markets with high
30-day delinquency rates (warmer colors in Fig. 2 (A))
over the entire time span, which indicated a large body
of late payments and the potential net losses for the
bank. To get a clearer picture of the behavior of those
markets, the analyst turned to the trend analysis view
to examine the development of these markets. As il-
lustrated by the clusters in Fig. 2 (C), the analysts
noticed that one investment market (red bubbles) was
particularly vulnerable (i.e. the cluster scattered over
the time), suggesting an unstable product performance
since the beginning of the credit crunch in late 2007 un-
til recently. Given that the general investment market is
recovering since 2009, the analysis team decided to first
take a closer look at unusual market behavior.
Instead of directly drilling down to that market, the
Xiaoyu Wang et al.: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks Analysis 9
Fig. 7 This presents comparison analysis between information from two customized workspaces.
team utilized the built-in workspaces to branch off their
current analysis to keep track of their analysis pro-
cesses. As shown in Fig. 7, the team created a new
workspace to compare the performance of the bank’s
own credit products with other competitors in that mar-
ket. A quick glance at Fig. 7 indicates that the compet-
ing banks on average invested more in that market and
maintained a quite healthy performance. This finding
immediately raised several questions: could the client
base affect the market performance? Or was it caused
by the unbalanced or sudden increase of investments
in that market (e.g. mortgage v.s. credit loans)? Al-
though these were all possible causes of the market de-
terioration, the risk analysts had no definitive answers
or evidence to confirm their hypotheses by looking at
the product comparison view alone.
Trying to verify these hypotheses, the team started to
search for clues from the investment history of that mar-
ket. By using fine-grain rules, they found that the invest-
ment in that market had always been a steady amount,
and a reasonable proportion between secured and unse-
cured credit products. This therefore rules out the pos-
sibility if investments patterns being the cause of this
fluctuation. However, a closer examination of client
bases in the heatmap view suggested a different story.
Fig. 2 (B) showed that, compared to the typical strat-
egy of pursuing consumers with higher credit scores,
these markets invested on a fair amount of population
with lower credit scores but with long credit histories.
A quick check on the trend analysis view (Fig. 5) fur-
ther indicated that, the trend of this consumer group has
peaked since 2008. A quick reference to the recent fi-
nancial news around that market confirmed that there
was an increasing amount of unemployment in market,
which gave the risk analysts reasons to conclude that the
changing in client bases may be a key factor in causing
the fluctuation of this market.
Given the unsatisfactory market performance and
concerns for losing more investment, the risk analyst
team indicated that this market needed more attentions
to bring its performance back on track. They also de-
cided they needed some strategies to alleviate the pres-
sure imposed on the customers and to help revive the
market. After this exercise, the risk analyst commented
on the effectiveness of RiskVA in helping them to ex-
plore the credit markets, as well as in identifying possi-
ble cause of market fluctuations. Although simple, the
scenario has demonstrated the usefulness of RiskVA in
support of strategic risk analysis.
6 Expert Evaluation: Visual Facilitation on
Tactical and Strategic Analyses
To assess the efficacy of our system, we conducted ex-
pert evaluations with end-users from Bank of America.
Our goal is to perform summative evaluation to mea-
sure how well RiskVA could facilitate their analyses.
During several on-site visits, we demonstrated the de-
sign of RiskVA and the utilities of each visualization to
a total number of 8 managers and analysts from or re-
lated to the risk analysis team. We invited analysts to
perform their standard analyses in a think-aloud man-
ner using RiskVA. We observed and documented the
10 Tsinghua Science and Technology, August 2012, 15(4): 000-000
details about their analysis processes. Finally, we con-
cluded the evaluation by gathering their feedback and
comments. Since RiskVA has been deployed to this
team, we also conducted email follow-ups to see if there
were additional comments they would like to share.
One of the benefits of RiskVA that was noted by all
risk analysts was its visual exploration environment that
enables them to perform more strategic rather than tac-
tical analyses. All analysts considered the ability to in-
teractively perform the aforementioned three analyses
simultaneously is powerful in portraying the detailed,
dynamic nature of emerging risks. To support tacti-
cal analysis, RiskVA allows the analysts to utilize their
prior knowledge about the market to verify known risk
patterns. It further helps pursue analysts’ tactical goals
using resources at hand. In RiskVA, rules are used to fa-
cilitate the interactive filtration and analysis of the credit
information at different granularities.
When this capability was presented to the risk ana-
lysts, they spontaneously formulated a variety of rules
to identify credit information. They were generally sat-
isfied with the efficiency and appreciated the flexibility
to perform customized analysis. Specifically, one of the
seasoned analysts commented that the ability of such in-
teractive analysis served two roles in supporting his tac-
tical analysis. On the one hand, he considered RiskVA
as an efficient environment to slice and dice market in-
formation and to test hypotheses. On the other hand, he
thought the ability to interactively construct rule helped
him match and confirm his expectations with the visual
representations, and gain confidence in using the sys-
tem. This helped addressing another important aspect
in risk analysis practices: the need to verify and vali-
date the accuracy of new technologies.
In assessing its efficacy in handle strategic risk anal-
ysis, many analysts considered RiskVA to be advanta-
geous in identifying the emerging risks. Particularly, it
reduced the amount of data noise and help analysts to
see a broader picture and home in on suspicious out-
liers. It further enables them to explore possible risk
patterns that were previously unidentified. As demon-
strated in the above scenario, RiskVA helped effectively
analyze sizable credit data and lead to the depiction of
the cause of market deterioration. All the analysts found
the system practical and believed it would be useful in
perform more strategic analysis. As summarized in one
comment, [RiskVA] first provides me the general idea
of what’s going on with the market. And quickly let
me navigate into a specific analysis segments...It allows
me to get more hands-on analysis, and to check what I
might have missed in analyzing the data.
One suggestion was to provide additional geospatial
analysis with more regional risk entities. Analyst would
like to see incorporated information like distances, den-
sities, and areas in analysis as possible explanatory vari-
ables. One participant suggested that some higher res-
olution geospatial view can be used to drill down be-
low the census Bureau’s Core Based Statistical Area
(CBSA) level, or create a geographical segmentation of
the US that’s independent of CBSA or ZIP. Then we can
compare our performance in these new entities.
7 Discussion and Future Work
We undertook this research to design a system that fa-
cilitates the risk analysts’ tactical and strategic analy-
ses. To this end, we presented RiskVA, an interactive
visual analytics system that demonstrated unique and
effective capabilities for a class of problems in risk anal-
yses. The design of RiskVA is grounded in the task
analysis results of a group of analysts from Bank of
America. These results provide us clear identification
of general domain analysis process, including fine-grain
task activities, task flows, and overall analysis objec-
tives. We further disseminated this general analysis pro-
cess into individual analytical requirements, and trans-
formed them into the specific system implementations
through iterative prototyping with the analysts.
There are limitations to our research that should be
addressed. Specifically, our research characterized the
domain analytical workflow through interviews, which
generally are self-reported by participants. This method
could be limited, in that it modeled the workflow
from a retrospective viewpoint, whereas Brows et al.[21]
demonstrated that problem spaces and solutions are es-
tablished and changed dynamically in interactions with
people and the environment. Therefore, our understand-
ing of domain task flow may be constrained to the risk
analysts’ general way of performing tasks. One way we
used to alleviate this constrain is enable the risk analysts
to customize RiskVA to fit their own workflows.
In addition, our research is limited by its evaluations
with domain experts. Given the privacy and propri-
etary considerations in BOA, we only evaluated RiskVA
through expert evaluations. While the results are posi-
tive, we believe much can be learnt if alternative meth-
ods were available. In particular, we would like to eval-
uate the analysts’ knowledge gain from using our sys-
Xiaoyu Wang et al.: A Visual Analytics System for Consumer Credit Risks Analysis 11
tem. However, developing evaluation strategies to accu-
rately assess the effectiveness of a visual analytics sys-
tem is challenging yet beyond the scope of this paper.
At this point we do not have a clear outline on the best
evaluation approach; the design of guidelines for sys-
tematically evaluating a visual analytic system would
be one interesting future direction for our research.
8 Conclusions
In this paper, we presented RiskVA, an interactive vi-
sual analytics system that demonstrated effective capa-
bilities for credit risk analyses. RiskVA supports a thor-
ough analysis of sizable credit data from financial insti-
tutions and permit them to better make their own assess-
ments of risk, independent of, and more focused than,
assessments they get from ratings agencies that may not
be suitable for the their situations. By placing analysts
in the center of the processes, RiskVA provides inter-
active environment to perform data exploration and to
correlate information over a large corpus of data. In our
expert evaluations, analysts confirmed the novelty and
utility of RiskVA in performing risk assessments, and
further expressed interests in using it in their daily tasks.
These results indicate the efficacy of the cognitive task
analysis process we undertook at the beginning. It is
essential that this task analysis be carried out and also
be made flexible to support exploration and unforeseen
analyses. RiskVA and other tools we have developed
indicate that this process is general. It is certainly clear
that RiskVA is a tool for emerging risk analysis and is
applicable across financial institutions.
References
[1] J. Allebach. Binary display of images when spot size ex-
ceeds step size. Applied Optics, 15:25132519, August
1980.
[2] M. Ankerst, D.A. Keim, H.-P. Kriegel, Circle Segments: A
Technique for Visually Exploring Large Multidimensional
Data Sets, in Proc. of Visualization 96, Hot Topics Session,
1996.
[3] Basel Committee for Banking Supervision.
www.bis.org/bcb.
[4] Nick Bloom (2007), The Impact of Uncertainty
Shocks’,National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. W13385,also available as CEP Discussion.
[5] T. Butkiewicz ; W. Dou; Z. Wartell; W. Ribarsky;
R. Chang, ”Multi-Focused Geospatial Analysis Using
Probes,” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on , vol.14, no.6, pp.1165-1172, Nov.-Dec.
2008.
[6] E. Catmull. A tutorial on compensation tables. In Com-
puter Graphics, volume 13, pages 17. ACM SIGGRAPH,
1979.
[7] R. Chang.; M. Ghoniem.; R. Kosara; W. Ribarsky,; Y. Jing
; E. Suma, C. Ziemkiewicz,; D. Kern; A. Sudjianto, ”Wire-
Vis: Visualization of Categorical, Time-Varying Data
From Financial Transactions,” Visual Analytics Science
and Technology, 2007. VAST 2007. IEEE Symposium on,
vol., no., pp.155-162, Oct. 30 2007-Nov. 1 2007.
[8] D.A. Keim, Pixel-Oriented Visualization Techniques for
Exploring Very Large Databases, Journal of Computa-
tional and Graphical Statistics, Vol 5, pp. 58 -77, 1996.
[9] D.A. Keim, T. Nietzschmann, N. Schelwies, J. Schnei-
dewind, T. Schreck, and H. Ziegler. A Spectral Visualiza-
tion System for Analyzing Financial Time Series Data. in
Proc. of Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visu-
alization (EUROVIS’06), pp. 195-200, 2006.
[10] S. Koch, H. Bosch; M. Giereth, T. Ertl; , ”Iterative integra-
tion of visual insights during patent search and analysis,”
Visual Analytics Science and Technology, 2009. VAST
2009. IEEE Symposium on , vol., no., pp.203-210, 12-13
Oct. 2009.
[11] J. Lin, M. Vlachos, E. Keogh, and D. Gunopulos, Itera-
tive Incremental Clustering of Time Series, Advances in
Database Technology - EDBT 2004, 9th Intl. Conference
on Extending Database Technology, 2004.
[12] J. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views
in exploratory visualization. In Fifth International Confer-
ence on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization, 2007. CMV ’07, pages 6171, July 2007.
[13] A. Savikhin, R. Maciejewski and David S. Ebert. Applied
Visual Analytics for Economic Decision-Making. IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST), pp. 107-114, 2008.
[14] C. Stolte, D. Tang, and P. Hanrahan. 2003. Multiscale Vi-
sualization Using Data Cubes. IEEE Transactions on Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics 9, 2 (April 2003), 176-
187.
[15] John Stasko, Carsten Gorg, and Zhicheng Liu, ”Jigsaw:
Supporting Investigative Analysis through Interactive Vi-
sualization”, Information Visualization, Vol. 7, No. 2,
Summer 2008, pp. 118-132.
[16] S. Rudolpn, A. Savikhin, and D.S. Ebert,; FinVis: Applied
visual analytics for personal financial planning, Visual An-
alytics Science and Technology, 2009. VAST 2009. IEEE
Symposium on , vol., no., pp.195-202, 12-13 Oct. 2009.
[17] M. Wattenberg. Visualizing the stock market. CHI Ex-
tended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, pp. 188 189, 1999.
[18] X. Wang, E. Miller., K. Smarick, W. Ribarsky, and R.
Chang (2008), Investigative Visual Analytsis of Global
Terrorism. Computer Graphics Forum, 27:919-926.
[19] X. Wang, W. Dou, S. Chen, W. Ribarsky, and R. Chang,
”An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Bridge Man-
agement”, presented at Computer. Graph. Forum, 2010,
pp.1033-1042.
[20] H. Ziegler; M. Jenny; T. Gruse; D.A. Keim.; Visual market
sector analysis for financial time series data, Visual Ana-
lytics Science and Technology (VAST), 2010.

