DEFORMABLE ALIGNMENT USING RANDOM PROJECTIONS OF LANDMARK IMAGES
Hui Wu?, Dustin M. Bowers?, Toan T. Huynh†, and Richard Souvenir?
?Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
†Department of General Surgery, Carolinas Medical Center
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a method for rigid alignment of objects
undergoing deformation. Automated algorithms can be af-
fected by auxiliary motion, such as image motion caused
by transducer movement in echocardiography. Unlike de-
formable registration methods, the goal of this work is align-
ment without introducing additional distortion. Our method,
based on random projection theory, incorporates motion
metadata for phase-aware alignment and outperforms rigid
alignment approaches on synthetic data. We demonstrate
the benefit of this as a pre-processing step to two common
biomedical image analysis tasks: object segmentation and
video denoising.
Index Terms— echocardiography, alignment
1. INTRODUCTION
Biomedical video analysis is often complicated by the move-
ment of the object of interest within the image plane. Whether
the motion is internal (e.g., patient breathing) or external (e.g.,
transducer motion in ultrasound), it is often an impediment
to later analysis (e.g., recognition, segmentation, shape esti-
mation). Often the motion is “small enough” that it can be
approximated as 2D rigid or affine motion.
Another complication is introduced when this auxiliary
motion is accompanied by an uncorrelated motion, especially
deformable motion. This is common in echocardiograms
obtained from a critical care setting (Figure 1). The heart
undergoes cyclic deformable motion while uncorrelated ap-
proximately rigid motion is introduced by the motion of the
transducer and/or the patient breathing. The presence of
deformable motion suggests that methods for non-rigid and
deformable registration (e.g., [1]) would suffice; however,
this is not the case. The deformable motion is typically the
motion pattern of interest, so image warps applied to this data
may affect inferences made on the motion patterns. In this
paper, we present a method for rigid alignment of deformable
objects that takes advantage of phase-correlated metadata
commonly collected with medical images. We demonstrate
how this approach, when used as a pre-processing step, im-
proves biomedical image analysis tasks, such as segmentation
and echocardiograms denoising.
Fig. 1. Each row shows two echocardiogram frames and ar-
rows indicating image motion. The top images vary due to
sensor motion (rigid), while the bottom vary due to heart mo-
tion (deformable). Our algorithm aligns objects that undergo
both types of motion simultaneously.
2. RELATEDWORK
Registration is a widely-studied problem, and the litera-
ture is vast. Aligning an object of interest is a common
pre-processing step for higher-level analysis, such as denois-
ing [2], atlas construction [3], or segmentation [4].
Classic registration algorithms apply pairwise alignment
through transforms of pairs of images in order to maximize
some similarity measure. This general approach can be ap-
plied to both rigid (e.g., [5]) and non-rigid deformations
(e.g., [1]). Recently, there has been increasing interest in
group-wise image alignment [6]. Similar to our work, these
methods assume that a single reference image is insufficient
for alignment; most update the reference iteratively until con-
vergence. Recent work makes use of the manifold relation
among images in a set. In [7], all of the images are registered
to the image with the closest geodesic distances to all other
points. While this work applies the manifold assumption, it
is used to register the images to a single reference.
In terms of methodology, the method most similar to our
work is [8], where the manifold property of natural image
sets is exploited to quickly align images of objects undergoing
rigid transformation. We extend this method to incorporate
the phase information of objects undergoing simultaneously
uncorrelated deformable motion.
time 
ph
as
e 
time 
ph
as
e 
time 
ph
as
e 
4 
1 3 
2 
Fig. 2. Overview of landmark selection. (left) Each point represents an input frame plotted by time (x-axis) and phase (y-axis).
(middle) Images that are close in time or phase are candidates for reference targets and are connected by an edge. (right)
Landmark images are selected using a greedy approach.
3. APPROACH
Under the brightness constancy constraint, the image registra-
tion problem is commonly formulated as:
min
?
? (IR, I(f(?))) (1)
where IR is a reference image, f is an image transforma-
tion with parameters ?, and ? is a dissimilarity measure (e.g.,
SSD). When extended to video, I = [I1, . . . , IN ], the refer-
ence image, IR is often selected from the set, and temporal
smoothing is commonly added to prevent large changes in
alignment parameters for consecutive frames.
For our problem, we are provided with real-valued meta-
data, S = [s1, ..., sN ], associated with the deformable mo-
tion. We use this to impose a neighborhood constraint be-
tween images with similar phase values (i.e., similar shape).
Incorporating temporal smoothness and the neighborhood
constraint leaves the following optimization:
min
?
?
i
?
j?Ni
? (Ii(?i), Ij(f(?j))) + ?
?
i
??????i?i
???? (2)
where ? = {?1, . . . , ?N} are the transformation parameters
for the video frames, ? is a weight on the smoothing term,
and Ni represents the set of images that are neighbors to im-
age i. Even for simple transformation models and similarity
metrics, this can be a nonlinear, non-convex optimization. In
the remainder of this section, we describe our approximation
algorithm for deformable object alignment, which relies on
selecting a small subset of images, called landmarks to serve
as reference images for alignment.
3.1. Landmark Selection
The goal of landmark selection is to find a set of images that
could serve as references, so the whole video is aligned. Ide-
ally, the set is small, yet spans the range of phase values. This
can be framed as a graph problem where the neighborhood re-
lation represents the pairwise suitability of images to serve as
references for each other. That is, we construct a graph, with
one vertex for each image, and an edge between vertices if
they are neighbors. Starting from a reference image (vertex),
on a connected graph, there exists a path, such that the ver-
tices on that path are adjacent to all of the vertices in graph.
That is, those vertices represent the set of landmark images
that will serve as reference images for alignment. Figure 2
demonstrates the landmark selection process.
3.2. Image Alignment Using Random Projections
The set of landmark images could be used to align the remain-
ing images. For efficient alignment, we employ the theory
of random projection, which has been previously used to im-
prove the speed of image alignment algorithms [8]. Briefly,
random projection is based on the theory that when high-
dimensional data (e.g., images) are projected onto a random
subspace (of sufficient dimensionality), the (dis)similarities
between the data points are preserved. The benefit is that dis-
tances can be computed more quickly in lower-dimensional
spaces and data structures (e.g., kd-trees) which are inefficient
for high-dimensional data, can be used. In the next section,
we combine landmark selection and alignment via random
projections for our deformable object alignment algorithm.
3.3. Algorithm
Given an input video, I = [I1, . . . , IN ], metadata, S =
[s1, ..., sN ], and a neighborhood relation, Ni for each frame,
our algorithm computes a set of corresponding rigid align-
ment parameters, ? = {?1, . . . , ?N}, as follows:
1. Construct a graph, G, with one vertex for each image,
and an edge between vertices vi and vj if j ? Ni.
2. Select a landmark image as the reference, IR. (Either
randomly or defined as input.)
3. Compute a random projection matrix, P .1
4. Project each image, Ii, and apply temporal smoothing
to the embedded coordinates
5. Let IL be the current landmark image, initialized to IR.
6. Until all the images are aligned:
(a) Transform IL across the range of transformation
parameters and maintain the projected coordi-
nates of each transformed instance.
1Due to space constraints, the details are omitted. However, a wide range
of sparse random matrices will suffice.
Fig. 3. Three synthetic video frames depicting the simultane-
ous deformable and rigid motions.
(b) For each image, Ij , adjacent to IL, find the clos-
est transformed instance, I ?L. Set the alignment
parameters of Ij to those of I ?L plus IL.
(c) Update IL to be the already aligned image adja-
cent to the most unaligned images.
Compared to full pairwise alignment, this greedy algo-
rithm is efficient and examines each image only a single time.
The most expensive step is 6(a), where the current landmark
is transformed and projected across the space of transforma-
tions. This occurs once for each landmark image, and in Sec-
tion 4, we demonstrate that the number of landmark images
does not increase with the video length.
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Our evaluation consists of quantitative results on synthetic
data and qualitative results on real-world data. For the syn-
thetic data, we measure the alignment accuracy of our method
compared to other approaches, and for the real-world data,
we evaluated how much object segmentation and image de-
noising are improved after our method is applied as a pre-
processing step. For all experiments, the neighborhood crite-
ria corresponds to a 10% maximum difference in phase value.
4.1. Synthetic Data
The synthetic video set was constructed by applying a para-
metric non-rigid warp to an initial shape and translating the
shape along an arbitrary path. Random Gaussian noise was
then added to each frame. Figure 3 shows three sample frames
from this data set. We compare the following approaches:
• BASE: baseline where each frame is aligned to a refer-
ence
• RP: single reference random projection method [8]
• LM: phase-aware landmark alignment (proposed)
For all the methods, the reference image was randomly se-
lected. For the baseline approach, sum of squares pixel dif-
ferences (SSD) was minimized. For all methods, error is com-
puted as the SSD between the returned alignment parameters
and the ground truth. Table 1 shows the average results for re-
peated experiments using all three methods. Error is reported
as RMSE in pixel distances from the known ground truth lo-
cation. For each trial, the motion patterns, noise level, and
reference image were randomized. Overall, our method (LM)
outperformed both methods.
Method RMSE
BASE 4.48 ± .96
RP 3.71 ± .84
LM 2.17 ± .96
Table 1. RMSE results on synthetic video in pixel units.
Fig. 4. Running time as a function of video length.
We measured the runtime, by varying the length of the in-
put video. Figure 4 shows the amount of time (in seconds) as
the number of frames increases. Similar to [8], the runtime is
dominated by transforming the landmark images. However,
the number of landmarks is determined by the data distribu-
tion and neighborhood criteria, not the number of frames.
4.2. Applications to Echocardiography
Even echocardiograms collected by trained technicians ex-
hibit image motion due to transducer motion. These slight
motions can be approximated by rigid image transformations.
Here, we demonstrate how our method can be used to improve
two common applications in echocardiography: segmenta-
tion and denoising. The data for these experiments consists
of parasternal short axis (PSAX) echocardiograms and phase
parameters extracted from the synchronized ECG signal using
an automated signal processing algorithm [9].
4.2.1. Left Ventricle Segmentation
Left ventricle segmentation is the most common application
in cardiac image analysis. We applied a method [4] that uses
an adaptive diffusion flow active-contour model to (1) the
original data and (2) after it was aligned by our method and
reordered by the phase parameter. Except for the first frame,
the contour for each frame was initialized using the final con-
tour from the previous frame. Figure 5 shows the segmen-
tation results on three sample frames using the original (top)
and aligned (bottom) data. In the unaligned case, there are
noticable instances of boundary leakage; most occur shortly
after larger than normal object motion in the image. Addition-
ally, the aligned case required fewer iterations of the method
to reach convergence.
Fig. 5. Each column shows the boundary detected using an
active contour method [4] on the original data (top) and after
alignment with our method (bottom).
Fig. 6. Each column shows (top) an echocardiogram frame
after phase-aware denoising on the (middle) original data and
(bottom) after alignment with our method .
4.2.2. Video Denoising
A recent phase-aware video denoising method [2] uses super-
vised manifold learning to denoise biomedical video given
associated phase-correlated metadata. By projecting the im-
ages to a manifold correlated with the phase metadata, this
approach discards uncorrelated motion information. We ap-
plied this method to PSAX echocardiograms, and the results
on three frames are shown in Figure 6. A visual comparison of
the denoised output of the original data (middle) and aligned
(bottom) shows significant differences. In the unaligned case,
motion blur is visible in the denoised output and detail is lost.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTUREWORK
We presented a method for phase-aware alignment of de-
formable objects. Cases of simultaneous rigid and non-rigid
are prevalent, especially in echocardiography. The ultrasound
data used in Section 4.2 were collected by an expert tech-
nician, yet it contained enough auxiliary motion to have an
impact on automated processing algorithms. For future work,
we plan to investigate better landmark selection schemes and
methods for selective projection of transformed landmarks.
6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Holden, “A review of geometric transformations
for nonrigid body registration,” Medical Imaging, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 111–128, 2008.
[2] H. Wu, D.M. Bowers, T.T. Huynh, and R. Souvenir,
“Biomedical video denoising using supervised manifold
learning,” in International Symposium on Biomedical
Imaging, 2013, pp. 1244–1247.
[3] A.F. Frangi, D. Rueckert, J.A. Schnabel, and W.J.
Niessen, “Automatic construction of multiple-object
three-dimensional statistical shape models: application to
cardiac modeling,” Medical Imaging, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 1151–1166, 2002.
[4] Y. Wu, Y. Jia, and Y. Wang, “Adaptive diffusion flow for
parametric active contours,” in Proc. International Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition, 2010, pp. 2788–2791.
[5] A. Roche, X. Pennec, G. Malandain, and N. Ayache,
“Rigid registration of 3-d ultrasound with mr images: a
new approach combining intensity and gradient informa-
tion,” Medical Imaging, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 20,
no. 10, pp. 1038–1049, 2001.
[6] T.F. Cootes, C.J. Twining, V.S. Petrovic, K.O. Babalola,
and C.J. Taylor, “Computing accurate correspondences
across groups of images,” Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 32, no. 11, pp.
1994–2005, 2010.
[7] S. Ying, G. Wu, Q. Wang, and D. Shen, “Groupwise reg-
istration via graph shrinkage on the image manifold,” in
Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2013, pp. 2323–2330.
[8] D.M. Healy and G.K. Rohde, “Fast global image registra-
tion using random projections,” in International Sympo-
sium on Biomedical Imaging. IEEE, 2007, pp. 476–479.
[9] Q. Zhang, A.I. Manriquez, C. Medigue, Y. Papelier, and
M. Sorine, “An algorithm for robust and efficient location
of t-wave ends in electrocardiograms,” Biomedical Engi-
neering, IEEE Trans on, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 2544 –2552,
Dec 2006.

