Supporting an Interval Training Program with  
the Astrojumper Video Game 
 
Andrea Nickel, Hugh Kinsey, Tiffany Barnes, Zachary Wartell 
 
Cite this paper as: 
 Andrea Nickel, Hugh Kinsey, Tiffany Barnes, Zachary Wartell. Supporting an Interval Training 
Program with the Astrojumper Video Game. In electronic proceedings of Meaningful Play 2012. 
October 18 - 20, East Lansing, MI, USA, 2012. 
 
 Bibtex: 
@INPROCEEDINGS{, 
  author = {Andrea Nickel, Hugh Kinsey, Tiffany Barnes, Zachary Wartell}, 
  title = {Supporting an Interval Training Program with the Astrojumper Video 
 Game}, 
  booktitle = {Meaningful Play 2012}, 
  year = {2012}, 
  address = {East Lansing, MI, USA}, 
  month = {October 18 - 20},} 
 
Running head: INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supporting an Interval Training Program with the Astrojumper Video Game 
Andrea Nickel, Hugh Kinsey, Tiffany Barnes, Zachary Wartell 
University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  2 
 
Abstract 
We have previously developed Astrojumper, an exercise video game with a space theme that 
uses the Microsoft Kinect to support full-body exertion play. In this paper, we present the design 
and evaluation of Astrojumper-Intervals, a new version of our Astrojumper exergame, that 
explores methods of improving upon the previous game in both aspects of enjoyment and 
exercise effectiveness. We also investigate how interval training, an established exercise 
technique used to increase the efficiency of time spent exercising, may be incorporated within a 
video game. A user study of 34 adult participants compared Astrojumper-Intervals with the 
original Astrojumper game in terms of exercise effectiveness, measured using heart rate, energy 
expenditure, and ratings of perceived exertion; and game enjoyment, measured with Likert scale 
ratings and qualitative feedback. We found that Astrojumper-Intervals elicited statistically 
significantly greater energy expenditure and heart rate increases than the original game. Also, 
despite participants’ wide variety of exercise motivations and opinions of games as exercise 
tools, the overall response to our game was very positive, with 27 of 34 participants preferring 
the new Astrojumper-Intervals game. 
 Keywords: exercise video games, exergame evaluation, interval training  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  3 
Supporting an Interval Training Program  
with the Astrojumper Video Game 
Exercise video games, alternatively “exergames” or “active video games,” are designed 
to elicit energy expenditure in players, using gaming technology and mechanics that support 
various forms of physical activity. Current, commercially available motion-sensing devices and 
gaming platforms, including the Nintendo Wii and Wii Fit balance board, dance pads, Sony’s 
PlayStation Move and the Microsoft Kinect, have increasingly provided developers with the 
tools to create games controlled by players’ physical movements. According to the 
Entertainment Software Association’s 2012 data, the average household owns at least one 
dedicated game console, PC or smartphone, and game players include people of all age, gender 
and ethnic groups (ESA, 2012). Exergames can promote increased physical activity among this 
wide audience through engaging and motivating play, which is especially important today given 
that the prevalence of obesity among adolescents and adults in the U.S. is a recognized problem. 
However, although exercise video games have great potential to address this problem, currently 
existing or available games still struggle to balance enjoyable gameplay with effective exercise, 
as Sinclair, Hingston and Masek described in their dual-flow model of attractiveness and 
effectiveness: respectively, the psychological aspect of gameplay and the physiological aspect of 
physical activity (Sinclair, 2007). We believe this issue can be addressed through the finding of 
new ways to combine knowledge from health and exercise-related research fields with the 
domain of video game design. 
Background 
Exercise video games have recognized potential to use engaging play to motivate 
increased physical activity. For those without access to a gym or safe, practical outdoor 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  4 
environments, exergames afford the opportunity to exercise within the home (Ahn, 2009). 
Awareness of physical activity levels, which is an important element in behavioral change 
adoption, can be greatly increased through exergame play (McLean, 2003); and exergames are 
also able to provide feedback on players’ performance and progress and help to develop 
individualized short- and long-term fitness goals. Exergames have also been effectively used for 
rehabilitation (Betker, 2007; Kizony, 2003). However, the previously mentioned balance 
between game attractiveness and exercise effectiveness discussed by Sinclair et al. (2007) 
remains a significant challenge (Berkovsky, 2010; Hämäläinen, 2005). A number of recent 
studies concerning the exercise effectiveness of active video games agree that these games are 
able to elicit light to moderate intensity energy expenditure, equivalent to activities such as 
walking or jogging. This is a level of energy expenditure sufficient to contribute to the 
recommended amounts of daily physical activity described by the American Heart Association 
and American College of Sports Medicine guidelines. These studies were conducted across age 
groups: children (Maddison, 2011; 2007; Bailey, 2011; Graf, 2009; Lanningham-Foster, 2009), 
adolescents (Graves, 2010; 2008), and adults (Miyachi, 2010; Lanningham-Foster, 2009). 
Additional positive effects of exergaming have also been noted. One study showed that a six-
month period of active exergame use resulted in a small but definite positive effect on body 
composition in overweight and obese children (Maddison, 2011). Other studies have shown 
higher adherence to exercise programs that use active video gaming, when compared to 
programs using more traditional forms of exercise (Rhodes, 2009; Mellecker 2008). However, 
there are studies that do not have similarly positive results. White, Schofield and Kilding (2011) 
examined energy expenditure in boys age 11.4 +/- 0.8 years engaged in a range of activities, 
including sedentary (resting, watching television, sedentary gaming), walking, running, and 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  5 
playing active games (Wii Bowling, Boxing, Tennis, and Wii Fit Skiing and Step). They found 
no significant difference in energy expenditure between active gaming and walking, and 
concluded that the activity in these games was not intense enough to contribute to the current 
daily activity recommendation for children (White, 2011). A different study of adolescents, 
young adults and adults playing Wii Fit activities found that although moderate intensity activity 
was elicited by the games for all age groups, heart rates were not raised to the point necessary 
for maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness (Graves, 2010). 
Astrojumper 
We have previously designed and evaluated Astrojumper, an exercise game developed 
for a Cave Automatic Virtual Environment (CAVE) virtual reality system, that used 
electromagnetic trackers to detect player movements. Astrojumper was successful in both 
attractiveness and effectiveness aspects, as measured by qualitative player feedback and a 
significant increase in heart rate over a 15-minute play session (Finkelstein, 2011). We have also 
previously developed a version of the Astrojumper game that utilizes the Microsoft Kinect for 
player tracking. The Kinect technology is more accessible than the CAVE system, and we also 
take advantage of the Kinect’s more accurate and higher-resolution body tracking abilities. We 
have now developed a second version of the Astrojumper game: Astrojumper-Intervals, 
introduced in Nickel (2012). Astrojumper-Intervals was designed to improve upon the original 
game in two areas. First, the variety of game mechanics and physical movements used during 
play was increased, in order to improve player enjoyment and the game’s ability to motivate 
repeat play, with the aim of encouraging exercise that results in health benefits. Second, the 
physical challenge of the game was increased through the inclusion of additional mechanics that 
targeted specific regions of the body and types of exercise. Our approach to the design of this 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  6 
game was also intended to investigate how game elements could be combined with established 
exercise training practice; to this end we based the gameplay progression on an interval training 
framework. This paper presents details of the design of Astrojumper-Intervals and the study 
conducted to compare it with the Kinect version of the original Astrojumper game. 
Interval Training 
The gameplay of Astrojumper-Intervals is based upon an interval training schedule. 
Interval training repeatedly alternates between periods of high-intensity exertion and recovery 
periods of low-intensity or no exertion. Both aerobic and anaerobic fitness can be improved in a 
shorter amount of time through interval training than through continuous training, as more work 
is performed at a higher intensity in that time (Karp, 2011; Boutcher, 2011). Interval training is 
an effective way for professional athletes to work on enhancing sports performance (Billat, 
2001) but is also an option for exercisers who desire changes in their routines to avoid boredom, 
or who want to improve their fitness level and the efficiency of time spent exercising (Babraj, 
2009). Interval training schedules may vary the duration of each interval. In an interval workout, 
the low-intensity and high-intensity time periods might remain constant (for example, one 
minute of low-intensity activity followed by one minute of high-intensity activity, and so on), or 
implement a pyramid structure where a minute of low-intensity activity is interspersed between 
high-intensity periods that last for 30 seconds, then 45s, 60s, 90s, 60s, 45s, and 30s. 
Astrojumper-Intervals follows this pyramid schedule, as described below. 
Astrojumper-Intervals 
Astrojumper-Intervals was developed for the PC, using the OpenSceneGraph graphics 
engine and the Microsoft Kinect for full-body tracking, with position and orientation data from 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  7 
the player skeleton detected using the Flexible Action and Articulated Skeleton Toolkit (FAAST) 
(Suma, 2011). 
Game Design 
In the Kinect version of the original Astrojumper game (referred to from here on as 
Astrojumper-Original), planets fly through space toward the player who must move from side to 
side, jump, or crouch to dodge them. The player earns bonus points and score multipliers by 
hitting bright gold planets that are mixed in with the obstacle planets. Also, at certain points 
during the game, a UFO appears and attacks by shooting lasers at the player, who may dodge 
them and make punching or throwing motions to shoot lasers back at the UFO and attempt to 
destroy it. Collision with game objects (planets and lasers) is checked using 15 tracked points on 
the player’s body, detected by the Kinect and FAAST software: the head, neck, torso, right and 
left shoulder, elbow and hand, and right and left hip, knee, and foot. The game is structured to 
include a beginning warm-up period, a main exercise period, and a final cool-down period in 
accordance with the ACSM’s guidelines for workout phases (American College of Sports 
Medicine, 2000). During the warm-up phase, planets initially move very slowly and gradually 
speed up. This is reversed in the final cool-down phase. In the main exercise phase, in order to 
provide a flexible level of challenge for players of different abilities and fitness levels, the game 
uses a dynamic difficulty adjustment system. This system changes the speed of planets based on 
player performance: if a player is doing well, i.e. dodging the majority of planets, the game will 
gradually speed up to increase the challenge level. If the player is struggling and colliding with 
more planets, the game will gradually slow down to let the player catch up. 
In the interval training version of the game, Astrojumper-Intervals, the planet-dodging 
gameplay is used as the main activity during the low-intensity exercise periods. In order to 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  8 
support the higher intensity periods and improve upon gameplay variety, Astrojumper-Intervals 
incorporates three new mini-games. Each of these mini-games focuses on one specific type of 
exercise or region of the body, and is designed to provide a more intense physical challenge than 
the planet-dodging game mechanic. Each mini-game also utilizes a slightly modified form of the 
original difficulty adjustment system, where the speed of gameplay may be increased or 
decreased based on the player’s success rate, but the difficulty of the mini-games is restricted 
from falling below a defined level. This is done in order to allow the mini-games to maintain a 
higher-intensity activity requirement. The gameplay of these three mini-games is described in the 
following sections. 
 
      
(a)        (b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 1: Screenshots of the Astrojumper-Intervals mini-games. (a) Space Invaders, (b) Asteroid 
Belt, and (c) Space Rock Band. 
 
 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  9 
Space Invaders 
In the Space Invaders mini-game, waves of approaching UFOs appear, and the player is 
able to constantly fire lasers at them by punching rapidly. The player earns points during this 
mini-game by hitting each UFO with lasers a certain number of times, finally destroying it. If the 
player fails to destroy UFOs before they reach the player, points are deducted from the player’s 
score. The rapid punching movements focus exertion on the upper body. (See Figure 1-a.) 
Asteroid Belt 
During the Asteroid Belt mini-game, horizontal rows of asteroids fly toward the player. 
These rows are positioned so that players must either duck under high rows or jump over low 
rows, and the positions (high or low) are randomly determined, presenting the player with an 
unpredictable sequence of jumps and crouching movements. In order for the low asteroid rows to 
be placed at a visible height and still allow the player to successfully jump over them, this mini-
game implements a “super-jump” system, where changes in knee positions are used to detect 
when the player is jumping, and allows the game to then augment the jump by raising the in-
game player skeleton higher than the player is actually able to physically jump. This activity 
targets the lower body, exercising muscle groups in the legs. Successfully avoiding the asteroids 
will add to the player’s score, and colliding with the asteroids will deduct points. (See Figure 1-
b.) 
Space Rock Band 
The Space Rock Band mini-game is designed to give players a more intense version of 
the aerobic challenge presented by the planet-dodging mechanic. Inspired by the Rock Band 
game mechanic in which players must correctly hit all of a series of glowing notes to succeed, 
Space Rock Band sends waves of stars toward the player, whose goal is to hit all of them in 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  10 
succession to play different sound effects and earn bonus points. Stars are positioned in a way 
that makes players move around the entire play space in both the horizontal and vertical 
directions, and in patterns that occasionally make players stretch to reach all of them at once. 
Points can be earned by successfully hitting stars, and additional points are given for hitting all 
possible stars. (See Figure 1-c.) 
Game Progression 
In Astrojumper-Original, a 15-minute play session includes: 3 minutes of warm-up, 9.5 
minutes of exercise with four ‘UFO battles’ occurring throughout, and 2.5 minutes of cool-down. 
Astrojumper-Intervals follows the same basic sequence, but implements a pyramid interval 
training pattern during the 9.5-minute workout. For the high-intensity intervals, each minigame 
is played twice: 30 seconds of Space Invaders, 45 seconds of Space Rock Band, and 60 seconds 
of Asteroid Belt, followed by a second 60 seconds of Asteroid Belt, 45 seconds of Space Rock 
Band, and 30 seconds of Space Invaders. Each of these intervals are followed by one minute of 
dodging planets, for the lower-intensity exertion period. 
Evaluation 
In order to compare the intensity of the exercise provided by the Astrojumper-Original 
and Astrojumper-Intervals games as well as players’ enjoyment of the gameplay, we conducted a 
within-subjects study where participants played each game for 15 minutes, in a randomly 
assigned order, for a total 30 minutes of play. Table 1 includes descriptive data on the 34 
participants: the range, average, and standard deviation for age, height, weight, and Body Mass 
Index. 
 
 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  11 
 
Table 1 Participant age, height, weight and BMI. 
Gender Age (years) Height (in.) Weight (lbs.) BMI 
Male 
N = 23 
Range: 18 – 28 
M = 20.83 
SD = 2.84 
Range: 60 – 73 
M = 69.65 
SD = 3.14 
Range: 120 – 230 
M = 166.74 
SD = 33.38 
Range: 18.47 – 33.9 
M = 24.17 
SD = 4.52 
Female 
N = 11 
Range: 18 – 37 
M = 23.55 
SD = 6.73 
Range: 60 – 68 
M = 63.64 
SD = 3.14 
Range: 92 – 170 
M = 134.64 
SD = 24.93 
Range: 17.97 – 31.17 
M = 23.37 
SD = 4.21 
 
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention estimates Body Mass Index (BMI) as ??????????????? ????, with results in the following categories: underweight (below 18.5), normal (18.5 – 24.9), 
overweight (25.0 – 29.9) and obese (30.0 and above). Although in cases where a person has high 
muscle mass the BMI measurement will not be accurate, it still may be used as a general 
heuristic for body fat percentage (CDC, www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/index.html). The average 
BMI for both male and female participants falls within the normal range, and the average self-
rating of lifestyle activity level was 4.74 on a 7-point scale (1 = “Not active at all”, 7 = 
“Extremely active”), indicating that the participants were, on average, reasonably healthy and 
active. 16 of 34 participants indicated they had previous experience with interval training. The 
average participant self-rating of video gaming frequency (hours per week spent playing games) 
was 1.36 (1 = low frequency, 1-3 hrs/week; 2 = medium frequency, 4-6 hrs/week) and 
participants generally agreed with the statement “I think video games are fun,” with an average 
rating of 5.85 on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = “Strongly disagree”, 7 = “Strongly agree”). 
Procedure 
Participants were invited into the research lab for individual 60-minute study sessions. 
An initial demographic survey was administered, and the participant was given a BodyMedia 
FIT armband to place around their upper left arm, which would measure energy expenditure 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  12 
(METs) during play. The armband required several seconds to begin detecting physiological 
input, after which it emitted an audible beep to signal the end of calibration. An initial resting 
heart rate measurement was taken using a Sportline Solo 925 heart rate monitor, and then the 
participant played 15 minutes of either Astrojumper-Original or Astrojumper-Intervals (assigned 
randomly as the participant entered the lab). A second heart rate measurement was taken 
immediately upon completion of the first 15 minutes of game play. The player was then asked to 
sit and fill out a survey asking about their experience with the game, including a subjective rating 
of perceived exertion (RPE), and time spent with the survey allowed players to rest and their 
heart rate to slow. After completing the survey participants were given additional time to rest if 
they wished before playing 15 minutes of the second game version (whichever version they did 
not play first). Heart rate was similarly measured before and after the second game session, and 
an identical short survey, asking about the participant’s experience with the second game, was 
given. Finally participants filled out a short questionnaire asking them to compare the two 
games, describe preferences, and include any additional comments. 
Evaluation of Exercise Effectiveness 
 Measures Three physiological measures were used to evaluate the level of exertion 
intensity elicited by each game. A Sportline Solo 925 heart rate monitor was used to take 
fingertip pulse heart rate measurements (beats per minute) before and after playing each game. A 
BodyMedia FIT armband was used to collect average METs (metabolic equivalent of task) data 
during each play session; this is a measure of energy expenditure during physical activities. 
Following each game, an abbreviated version of the Borg (1970) Rating of Perceived Exertion 
(RPE) scale was used to evaluate participants’ perceived level of exertion as ‘None’ (0), ‘Light’ 
(1), ‘Moderate’ (2), ‘Hard’ (3), or ‘Very Hard’ (4). 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  13 
Results Perceived exertion ratings did not significantly differ (p = 0.07) between game 
versions: Astrojumper-Original (M = 2.03, SD = 0.83, Range = 0 to 3) and Astrojumper-Intervals 
(M = 2.27, SD = 0.72, Range = 1 to 4). However, average energy expenditure was statistically 
significantly greater (p = 0.042) during Astrojumper-Intervals than Astrojumper-Original: 
Astrojumper-Original METs (M = 4.745, SD = 1.57); Astrojumper-Intervals METs (M = 5.03, 
SD = 1.8). Further, average METs for both games are significantly greater than a METs value of 
4 (Astrojumper-Original: p = 0.03; Astrojumper-Intervals: p = 0.003), which is useful to note as 
the CDC defines moderate intensity energy expenditure as 3-6 METs (provided examples of 
activities at this level include dancing, swimming, or biking on a level surface) 
(http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/physical/pdf/PA_Intensity_table_2_1.pdf). Also, a 2x2 
mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) testing the effects of gender and time (change in heart rate 
as a result of play) showed a significant change in heart rate from pre-game to post-game 
measurements for both games (p = 0.000), with Astrojumper-Intervals causing a statistically 
significantly (p = 0.018) greater increase in heart rate: Astrojumper-Original pre-game HR (M = 
90.42) and post-game HR (M = 113.55) compared with Astrojumper-Intervals pre-game HR (M 
= 87.29) and post-game HR (M = 119.15). 
Implications for Exercise Effectiveness These results indicate that the interval training 
version of Astrojumper succeeds in eliciting greater exertion than the original game version 
through a 15-minute play session, and it is interesting to note that despite this result, there was no 
significant difference in rating of perceived exertion. It is possible that differences in game play, 
and their effect on player engagement, could influence a subjective exertion rating: this would be 
a positive conclusion, as one of the benefits of immersive play is the ability to distract from any 
discomfort caused by exertion. However, clearer results could potentially be obtained using an 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  14 
increased participant sample size, or with a sample population of less normally active 
participants. 
Additionally, it should be noted that post-game heart rate measurements most likely do 
not reflect peak HR achieved by playing either game, as the post-game measurements were taken 
after each game’s ending cool-down phase. In total, 29 of 33 players (87.9%) reached 50% or 
above of their maximum heart rate (MHR), 15 of 33 (45.5%) reached 60% or above of their 
MHR, and 5 of 33 (15.2%) reached 70% or above of their MHR (the CDC roughly calculates 
MHR as 220 – age). The target heart rate “zones” necessary to improve cardiovascular fitness 
vary by individual fitness level, for example, the ACSM recommends that a sedentary person 
work out at 55-65% of their MHR, while more fit individuals need to work at 65-80% of MHR 
to see improvement. In evaluating the effectiveness of a game’s exercise, it would be beneficial 
to form a clearer picture of peak HR reached, and the length of time an increased heart rate is 
maintained. Also, no correlation was found between players’ final scores and the amount of 
effort expended as measured by HR or METs. Improvement in this area would allow better 
estimates of a game’s exercise effectiveness, and be especially useful when offering accurate 
performance or progress feedback to players. 
Evaluation of Game Attractiveness 
 Measures Primary measures of game enjoyment and motivation to engage in physical 
activity were 7-point Likert scale items on the post-game surveys given to participants after each 
play session, and on the questionnaire given at the end of the study. We asked players to rate 
how much fun they had while playing, how easy or difficult it was to understand and play the 
game, and what they thought of the game’s challenge level. We also asked which game they 
preferred, if they would recommend the game to friends, and gathered qualitative feedback on 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  15 
opinions of the game, the experience, and whether they thought video games could be effective 
exercise tools. 
 Results Of seven items included on the post-game surveys where participants rated 
agreement with statements such as, “I found Astrojumper to be less stimulating than my usual 
exercise routines,” and “I felt Astrojumper gave me a good challenge,” no significant differences 
were found between the Astrojumper-Original and Astrojumper-Intervals responses. However, 
responses to both games were generally positive. On the 7-point Likert scale (1 = “strongly 
disagree”, 7 = “strongly agree”), average agreement with the statement “I found Astrojumper to 
be a fun experience” was M = 5.35 for Astrojumper-Original and M = 5.36 for Astrojumper-
Intervals; the statement “I felt Astrojumper gave me a good challenge” was M = 5.18 for 
Astrojumper-Original and M = 5.35 for Astrojumper-Intervals. More interesting results were 
found in the final game comparison questionnaire, in which 27 of 34  respondents (79.4%) stated 
a preference for Astrojumper-Intervals. The reasons given for this preference centered around the 
greater variety of both gameplay and types of movements used to play, which kept players more 
entertained and focused through the entirety of the workout, presented a better challenge, and felt 
more interactive. Four of the remaining participants preferred Astrojumper-Original for its level 
of challenge, and the final three did not prefer either game over the other. It is also notable that 
79.4% of respondents said they would be willing to recommend Astrojumper (their preferred 
game version) to friends: a response that could indicate the game’s potential to motivate 
increased adaptation and possibly adherence (repeated play), both of which would be desirable 
for an effective exergame. 
 
 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  16 
Discussion 
Study participants stated a wide variety of motivations behind their exercise habits. Many 
described exercise as an activity done to maintain health, increase positive attitude, and decrease 
stress; other reasons included participation on sports teams, losing weight, or wanting to improve 
appearance. One said it helped motivate them to quit smoking, and another cited simple 
enjoyment. Given this diversity, it is encouraging that the majority of participants had such a 
positive response to Astrojumper. A few valuable insights into exergame design can also be 
taken from this study. The structure of Astrojumper-Intervals demonstrates how to incorporate a 
traditional exercise program into a video game for the purpose of increasing the physical 
challenge and potential physiological benefit of the game. We can also see how increased game 
variety affects player enjoyment, and recognize that in an exercise game, variety can come not 
only from game goals and mechanics, but also from types of physical movements that the player 
is allowed to engage in while playing. 
 Despite the positive response to Astrojumper, participants’ opinions on whether or not 
video games in general can be effective and motivational exercise tools reflect awareness that the 
state of currently available exergames, or at least their perception, is behind that of traditional 
video games in terms of gameplay and utilization of technological capabilities, and even farther 
behind traditional established exercise techniques in the ability to provide really effective 
workouts. Opinion statements from the majority of participants seemed to follow a pattern in that 
they were willing to believe exercise games could be enjoyable and effective, but only for certain 
populations or under certain circumstances. Specifically, gamers, inactive people, and children 
were mentioned as being the groups most likely to enjoy and benefit from exergames. The 
following quotes illustrate some of these perceptions: “I think that [exergaming] is beneficial to 
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  17 
encourage gamers to actually get involved in physical activities. Sitting around eating and 
pushing buttons… isn’t healthy, at least this way they enjoy what they’re doing and get a 
positive effect from it,” or, “I think [exergames] are a great idea! As popular as gaming consoles 
are and as lazy as people are this is a great way to get lazy folks to exercise,” and, “I think with 
improvement of the kinect/wii this could be a huge increase in exercise activity. There are too 
many glitches right now for it to be effective enough to get people into a fun work out routine.” 
 As exergame research advances, developers will become more experienced with the 
design requirements for enjoyable physical activity as well as enjoyable gameplay, and with 
more sophisticated uses of commodity motion-sensing technology. We will be better able to 
integrate the fields of game design and exercise science, to create active video games that appeal 
to audiences of all ages, interests, and goals. The Astrojumper interval training game offers one 
example of how this may be done, and future work will aim to make further improvements to the 
incorporation of exercise techniques with established game design practice, as well as to the 
methods used to evaluate exergames’ potential to help players reach long-term fitness goals. 
 
  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  18 
References 
Ahn, M., Kwon, S., Park, B., Cho, K., Choe, S., Hwang, I., Jang, H., Park, J., Rhee, Y. & Song,  
 J. (2009). Running or gaming. Proceedings of the international conference on advances  
 in computer entertainment technology, 422, 345-348. 
American College of Sports Medicine. (2000). ACSM’s guidelines for exercise testing and  
 prescription (6th ed.). Baltimore, MD : Lippincott Williams & Williams. 
Babraj, J., Vollaard, N., Keast, C., Guppy, F., Cottrell, G., & Timmons, J. (2009). Extremely  
 short duration high intensity interval training substantially improves insulin action in  
 young healthy males. BMC Endocrine Disorders, 9(3). 
Bailey, B., & McInnis, K. (2011). Energy cost of exergaming: a comparison of the energy cost of  
 6 forms of exergaming. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 165(7), 597-602. 
Berkovsky, S., Coombe, M., Freyne, J., Bhandari, D., & Baghaei, N. (2010). Physical activity  
motivating games: virtual rewards for real activity. Proceedings of the 28th international  
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 243-252. 
Betker, A., Desai, A., Nett, C., Kapadia, N., & Szturm, T. (2007). Game-based exercises for  
dynamic short-sitting balance rehabilitation of people with chronic spinal cord and  
traumatic brain injuries. Physical Therapy, 87(10), 1389-1398. 
Billat, L. (2001). Interval training for performance: a scientific and empirical practice: special  
 recommendations for middle- and long-distance running. Part I: aerobic interval training.  
 Sports Medicine, 31(1), 13-31. 
Borg, G. (1970). Perceived exertion as an indicator of somatic stress. Scandinavian journal of  
 rehabilitation medicine, 2(2), 92-98. 
Boutcher, S. (2011). High-intensity intermittent exercise and fat loss. Journal of Obesity, 2011:  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  19 
 868305. 
The Entertainment Software Association (2012). Essential Facts About the Computer and Video  
 Game Industry – 2012 Sales, Demographic and Usage Data.  
 http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/ESA_EF_2012.pdf 
Finkelstein, S., Nickel, A., Lipps, Z., Barnes, T., & Wartell, Z. (2011). Astrojumper: Motivating  
 Exercise with an Immersive Virtual Reality Exergame. Presence: Teleoperators and  
 Virtual Environments, 20(1), 78-92. 
Graf, D., Pratt, L., Hester, C. & Short, K. (2009). Playing active video games increases energy  
 expenditure in children. Pediatrics, 124(2), 534-540. 
Graves, L., Ridgers, N., Stratton, G. (2008). The contribution of upper limb and total body  
 movement to adolescents’ energy expenditure whilst playing Nintendo Wii. European  
 Journal of Applied Physiology, 104(4), 617-623. 
Graves, L., Ridgers, N., Williams, K., Stratton, G., Atkinson, G., & Cable, N. (2010). The  
 physiological cost and enjoyment of Wii Fit in adolescents, young adults, and older  
 adults. Journal of Physical Activity and Health, 7(3), 393-401. 
Hämäläinen, P., Ilmonen, T., Höysniemi, J., Lindholm, M., & Nykänen, A. (2005). Martial arts  
in artificial reality. CHI '05: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in  
computing systems, 781-790. 
Karp, J. (2011). Interval training: the new and better way to train your clients? IDEA Fitness  
 Journal, 8(2), 31. 
Kizony, R., Katz, N., & Weiss, P. (2003). Adapting an immersive virtual reality system for  
rehabilitation. The Journal of Visualization and Computer Animation, 14, 261-268. 
Lanningham-Foster, L., Foster, R., McCrady, S., Jensen, T., Mitre, N., & Levine, J. (2009).  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  20 
 Activity-promoting video games and increased energy expenditure. Journal of Pediatrics,  
 154(6), 819-823. 
Maddison, R., Foley, L., Mhurchu, C., Jiang, Y., Jull, A., Prapavessis, H., Hohepa, M., &  
 Rodgers, A. (2011). Effects of active video games on body composition: a randomized  
 controlled trial. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 94(1). 
Maddison, R., Mhurchu, C., Jull, A., Prapavessis, H., & Rodgers, A. (2007). Energy expended  
 playing video console games: an opportunity to increase children’s physical activity?  
 Pediatric Exercise Science, 19(3), 334-343. 
McLean, N., Griffin, S., Toney, K., & Hardeman, W. (2003). Family involvement in weight  
 control, weight maintenance and weightloss interventions: a systematic review of  
 randomized trials. International Journal of Obesity, 27, 987-1005. 
Mellecker, R., & McManus, A. (2008). Energy expenditure and cardiovascular responses to  
 seated and active gaming in children. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,  
 162(9), 886-891. 
Miyachi, M., Yamamoto, K., Ohkawara, K. & Tanaka, S. (2010). METs in adults while playing  
 active video games: a metabolic chamber study. Medicine and Science in Sports and  
 Exercise, 42(6), 1149-1153. 
Nickel, A., Kinsey, H., Haack, H., Pendergrass, M., & Barnes, T. (2012). Interval Training with  
 Astrojumper. IEEE Virtual Reality, 161-162. 
Rhodes, R., Warburton, D., & Bredin, S. (2009). Predicting the effect of interactive video bikes  
 on exercise adherence: an efficacy trial. Psychology, Health and Medicine, 14(6), 631- 
 640. 
Sinclair, J., Hingston, P., & Masek, M. (2007). Considerations for the design of exergames.  
INTERVAL TRAINING WITH ASTROJUMPER  21 
 Graphite ’07: Proceedings of the 5th international conference on computer graphics and  
 interactive techniques in australia and southeast asia (pp. 289-295). New York, NY,  
 USA : ACM. 
Suma, E., Lange, B., Rizzo, A., Krum, D. & Bolas, M. (2011). FAAST: The Flexible Action and  
 Articulated Skeleton Toolkit. Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality, (pp. 247-248). 
White, K., Schofield, G., & Kilding, A. (2011). Energy expended by boys playing active video  
 games. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 14(2), 130-134. 

