Legible Cities: Focus-Dependent Multi-Resolution
Visualization of Urban Relationships
Remco Chang, Ginette Wessel, Robert Kosara, Eric Sauda, William Ribarsky
Abstract—Numerous systems have been developed to display large collections of data for urban contexts; however, most have
focused on layering of single dimensions of data and manual calculations to understand relationships within the urban environment.
Furthermore, these systems often limit the user’s perspectives on the data, thereby diminishing the user’s spatial understanding of
the viewing region. In this paper, we introduce a highly interactive urban visualization tool that provides intuitive understanding of the
urban data. Our system utilizes an aggregation method that combines buildings and city blocks into legible clusters, thus providing
continuous levels of abstraction while preserving the user’s mental model of the city. In conjunction with a 3D view of the urban
model, a separate but integrated information visualization view displays multiple disparate dimensions of the urban data, allowing the
user to understand the urban environment both spatially and cognitively in one glance. For our evaluation, expert users from various
backgrounds viewed a real city model with census data and confirmed that our system allowed them to gain more intuitive and deeper
understanding of the urban model from different perspectives and levels of abstraction than existing commercial urban visualization
systems.
Index Terms—Urban models, information visualization, multi-resolution.
1 INTRODUCTION
Most existing urban model visualization systems focus on layering a
few dimensions of data over a 2D map or a 3D model with a limited
number of buildings. Often the layering uses colors to depict the data,
which quickly limits the number of layers that the user can see at the
same time before the combinations of layers become too complex to
understand. More importantly, existing systems limit the user’s in-
teractions when focusing on specific regions of interest. Specifically,
many systems allow the user to drag a bounding box around the area
of interest for zooming in. This interaction diminishes the user’s un-
derstanding of the selected region of interest in relation to the rest of
the city both in the sense of spatial relationships and the underlying
depicted data.
From interviews with architects and urban planners, we recognize
that visualization of an urban model must occur on all levels of ab-
straction. For example, when the architects and planners are asked to
describe New York City, the descriptions always range from a global
level such as “New York is large, compact, and crowded,” to the lo-
cal level such as “the area that I lived in had a strong mix of ethnic
groups.” Furthermore, there is often a strong sense of relationship
in the localized descriptions, “the community that I lived in is more
heterogenous than the surrounding neighborhoods.” These comments
combined indicate that not only do urban visualization tools need to
be multi-resolution, the tools also need to show relationships among
neighborhoods in a focus-dependent manner.
Our approach is therefore quite different from existing ones. We
build on the idea of urban legibility, which is a concept made famous
in the 1960s by Lynch [20]. Rather than being just random collec-
• Remco Chang is with UNC Charlotte Department of Computer Science,
E-mail: rchang@uncc.edu.
• Ginette Wessel is with UNC Charlotte College of Architecture, E-mail:
gmwessel@uncc.edu.
• Robert Kosara is with UNC Charlotte Department of Computer Science,
E-mail: rkosara@uncc.edu.
• Eric Sauda is with UNC Charlotte College of Architecture, E-mail:
ejsauda@uncc.edu.
• William Ribarsky is with UNC Charlotte Department of Computer
Science, E-mail: ribarsky@uncc.edu.
Manuscript received 31 March 2007; accepted 1 August 2007; posted online
27 October 2007.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to:
tvcg@computer.org.
tions of buildings, a city has certain parts that people intuitively un-
derstand and aggregate when describing it from different levels of ab-
straction. These understandings and aggregations are often based on
people’s tendencies towards neighborhoods of similar ethnicities and
social backgrounds. Together, they form parts of the basis of the el-
ements of legibility as defined by Lynch. Using these legibility ele-
ments, we build a tool that provides not only the spatial view but also
an information display depicting abstract data such as demographic
information, land use, etc. The spatial data is linked with the abstract
data so that they maintain and provide the same understanding and
aggregation through all levels of abstraction.
Using the tool we developed, UrbanVis, the user can find parts of a
city that are defined in terms of their spatial layout or boundaries, and
then explore their properties. How similar are the people living in a
borough, district, or neighborhood? What is the distribution of ethnic
groups throughout a city? Through these explorations, the user can be-
gin to understand the properties of the city and envision how changes
would impact the urban environment, not just in terms of the physical
buildings, but also how such changes affect the social infrastructure.
What happens to surrounding neighborhoods if we put a school here?
How will changing an area from residential to commercial zoning af-
fect the local economy?
Our approach is unique in that it builds an urban visualization on
a clustering algorithm with the goal of providing physical and infor-
mational views to the user that are easy to understand from all lev-
els of abstraction. By aggregating the data based on the elements of
legibility, UrbanVis opens up many possibilities for exploration and
re-examination of existing understandings of a city.
For the user evaluation, we surveyed fourteen experts with different
occupational backgrounds ranging from real estate developers and ur-
ban planners to geographic information system (GIS) users. From this
user evaluation we formally identify features of the system that were
most useful to these professional urban experts as well as a range of
possible future directions. We concluded that a majority of the partic-
ipants believed our visualization tool enabled them to better perform
their daily tasks as it provided new features that were not available in
current commercial software systems.
2 RELATED WORK
We build on work in urban planning and urban legibility, model sim-
plification, and the connection between information visualization and
geographical views.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 1. The building model aggregation used by UrbanVis. a) View of
downtown Charlotte and its surrounding regions from afar; b) what is ac-
tually being rendered when the selected yellow box region is enlarged;
c) using a pixel tolerance ? of 50; d) setting ? to 500: notice that as ?
increases, so does the amount of aggregation. This results in larger, but
fewer, clusters.
2.1 Urban Legibility
Urban planning has focused largely on the use of social, economic,
and political factors in evaluating urban growth and development [13].
The methodologies are adapted from the social sciences, and involve
accumulation and analysis of complex data. There is relatively little
emphasis given to the detailed form or geometry of the city. The work
that does seek to connect social and political factors to urban form
does so on a local rather than a city or regional scale [18].
Alternatively, urban design has focused on the form and geome-
try of the city. Traditionally, simple geometric models of the city
have been the basis of discussion and design, either in planimetric
view [24], in sequential perspective view [5] or using cognitive map-
ping [20]. There has been relatively little emphasis on policy factors
in urban design, and little way to relate these issues to urban form.
There has been recent work seeking to explicitly link urban mor-
phology and underlying economic, social and politics at all scales of
urbanism. The work done at Harvard directed by Rem Koolhaas has
sought to weave the economic, political and social factors explicitly
into the development of urban form [4]. Mitchell, in his book City of
Bits [22], wrote about the emergence of urban forms that will change
from fixed ideas of space to shifting realms of intersecting digital and
spatial networks. Neither of these efforts has been explicit about tools
that will enable these new insights.
2.2 Model Clustering and Aggregation
Typical work in simplifying models does not take the specifics of
buildings into account, changing their shapes in arbitrary ways (Gar-
land and Zhou [12] provide a detailed overview of line, surface, and
volume simplification methods). Work that is more specific to mod-
els of urban environments is usually geared towards a specific use,
like walk-throughs at ground level, but does not perform very well for
overviews [31].
We utilize the urban model clustering and simplification method
proposed by Chang et al. [2]. This method consists of two parts.
During preprocessing, it computes a hierarchical spatial clustering of
building models based on Lynch’s ideas. This method is specific to
city models, and produces much more recognizable results for this
type of data than general mesh decimation or simplification algorithms
(a more in-depth discussion is available elsewhere [3]).
During runtime, a view-dependent level-of-detail algorithm
chooses the appropriate clusters to render based on a pixel error met-
ric (Figure 1a/b). In a rendering application, this is measured relative
to the eye point of the camera, which the user controls, as well as a
global quality parameter ? . Low values of ? mean lower pixel errors
and therefore higher accuracy and similarity to the original models;
whereas high values of ? create larger and fewer clusters and lower
number of polygons at the cost of visual fidelity (Figure 1c/d).
2.3 Information and Geographical Visualization
Commercial GIS software provides tools which manage and display
georeferenced data. Commonly available GIS software products are
ESRI’s ArcGIS [9], Intergraph’s GeoMedia [16], MapInfo’s Spatial-
Ware [21], and GRASS GIS [14]. Mapping components of the soft-
ware allow the user to view, analyze, and present geographic data.
These GIS software generate 2D or 3D representations using the con-
straints from data input into the program. In order to test alternative
scenarios the input data must be altered and a new output generated.
A frequent criticism of GIS software systems is that they are cumber-
some, over-complicated, resource-hungry, and require specialist ex-
pertise to understand and use [6].
Several attempts have been made to solve these problems by com-
bining information visualization views with geographical views. Geo-
VISTA Studio [11] is noteworthy as an early attempt to integrate clas-
sical GIS visualization with information visualization views including
parallel coordinates [15, 8]. Improvise [28], a system with similar
principals but also with extended flexibility in browsing visualizations
of relational data, has been used to visualize the US Census data [29].
A classic example of the combination of a geographical view with in-
teractive querying is HomeFinder [30], which lets users find houses
that fulfill certain criteria. Dykes et al. [7] give a survey of the existing
systems and future trends of geovisualization. Our system differs from
existing approaches in that we focus on aggregation of the models in
the geographical view, thus allowing the user to choose the desired
level of focus without losing the overall context. Shanbhag et al. [25]
use visualization of demographic data over time to validate partition-
ings. This is very close in spirit to our work, but lacks any data on the
physical layout of buildings, separators, etc.
The task of evaluating the effectiveness of geovisualization sys-
tems is not trivial [10, 1]. Although researchers have tried to mea-
sure the effectiveness in quantitative manners using task-based user
studies [17, 26], the issue of measuring usefulness of geovisualization
systems that are designed for exploratory purposes without specific
tasks remains an open problem [10, 23]. For our system, which is de-
signed to be exploratory in nature, we choose an evaluation based on
the opinions of domain expert users.
3 SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The system uses two views (Figure 2): a 3D model view and a multi-
dimensional data view. The views each have their own window, mak-
ing window management easier on setups with two screens or projec-
tors. The two views are fully linked and each accepts user interaction.
The 3D model view shows clusters of buildings based on legibility el-
ements and provides spatial awareness within the urban environment.
The data view displays abstract information of the clusters shown in
the 3D model view and adds an extra perspective for understanding
the city. Together, the views allow the user to explore the urban model
from both the geographical and the informational angles.
3.1 3D Model View
The 3Dmodel view (Figure 2, right) shows the geometries of the build-
ings in the city, and thus acts as a navigation tool and the display for
building clusters at the same time. The user can interactively navigate
the city using either mouse or keyboard and view the city from any
view distance or angle.
The focus which guides the aggregation of buildings is normally
the eye point of the camera which the user controls. To decouple the
Fig. 2. UrbanVis overview. The data view on the left shows demographic data of the areas around the focus point (focus in the middle). The model
view on the right shows the clustered building models. The color gradient indicates the distance from the focus point, and provides a visual link
between the two different data views (matrix view and parallel coordinates) and the model view. The data shown is census data for the city of
Charlotte in Mecklenburg county, North Carolina. The straight lines in the lower half of the model view are where the city and county border South
Carolina.
(a) (b)
Fig. 3. Changing the zoom level of the focal point (shown as a yellow
sphere and a line connecting it to the ground). The color gradient from
red to blue shows the proximity of the clusters to the focus. a) When
the sphere is far away from the ground, the region of interest is larger,
and the user can see an overview of the area at a glance; b) when the
sphere is closer to the ground, the region of interest and clusters are
smaller, thus allowing a more detailed inspection.
clustering from the viewing, the eye point is represented by a yellow
sphere which is connected to the ground with a thin line. The user can
move the sphere around the map and also up and down to change the
clustering: when the sphere is high above the ground, the cluster sizes
are larger (resulting in fewer overall clusters), allowing the user to see
overviews of the entire area. When the sphere is lower to the ground,
cluster sizes under the sphere are finer (resulting in more overall clus-
ters), allowing the user to inspect a specific local region (Figure 3).
The focus region is thus not a fixed area, but varies with distance from
the focus point directly under the sphere. The degree of focus is shown
on the buildings themselves as a color gradient from red to blue. These
colors provide a link between the two views (see below), and give the
user an indication of how narrow or wide the focus currently is.
The user can select and highlight any cluster by double-clicking on
it (Figure 4a), and also view the urban model as individual buildings
(a) (b)
Fig. 4. (a) User selects and highlights a cluster in the model (shown
as white); (b) at any time, the user can change the view to looking at
individual buildings instead of clusters.
rather than clusters for a closer inspection of a neighborhood (Fig-
ure 4b).
3.2 Data View
The data view (Figure 2, left) consists of two parts that display the
same information in different ways: a matrix panel and a parallel co-
ordinates panel. Both show the data associated with buildings or build-
ing clusters relative to the position of the focus point. The examples
in this paper use demographic data from the 2000 Census, but any ge-
ographically linked data (e.g., traffic statistics, crime rates, etc.) could
be shown.
The top part of the data view can be switched between bar charts,
line charts, or gradient charts (Figure 5). In any case, the view is
organized in columns with each linked to a cluster. The columns are
labeled with colors that correspond to cluster colors in the model view.
The number of columns therefore changes dynamically with the num-
ber of clusters that are displayed as the user changes the level of detail
or moves the focus around the city.
There are two orderings of columns. Under normal use, the clusters
Fig. 5. Different displays of the same data; (top) Bar charts; (middle)
line charts; (bottom) gradient grid charts.
(a) (b)
Fig. 6. Sorting columns. a) normally, columns are sorted by the dis-
tances of their corresponding clusters to the focal point. The closer the
clusters are to the focal point, the closer the column is to the middle of
the screen (and more red in color); b) the user can also sort the columns
based on a specific data dimension.
closest to the focal point are drawn in the middle of the view (Fig-
ure 6a), which corresponds to the usual way the model view is used,
i.e., the user will keep the focus close to the center of the view, and
recenter if needed. The user can also sort the columns depending on
the values of a selected category of data for quick identification of the
clusters with the desired value ranges (Figure 6b).
Each row of the bar/line/gradient charts shows a specific dimension
of the represented data. The graphs are color-coded to show group-
ings of related categories, making quick identification and orientation
easier. In Figure 6, there are 14 categories of data, separated into 6
different groups.
The bottom part of the data view shows the same data, but using par-
allel coordinates [15] to better show relationships between dimensions
in the data. Like the matrix panel, the lines in the parallel coordinates
view are color-coded to match the cluster colors, and the colors of the
axes correspond to the colors of the rows in the matrix view.
Although the two views depict the same data, we find that the dif-
ferent presentations of the data give the user different types of under-
standing. The matrix view shows the relationship between clusters of
buildings that are close to each other. The user can thus quickly see
the homogeneity of the neighborhoods around the focal point. Sorting
the matrix by a data dimension can also reveal correlations between
data properties.
The parallel coordinates view cannot show spatial relationships, but
can easily reveal relationships between data dimensions, allowing the
user to easily identify positive or negative correlations between cate-
gories.
Fig. 7. Using a slider to find buildings in the city that fit a specific crite-
rion. In this example, only buildings that are built after 1985 are shown.
3.3 Dimension Thresholding
The tools presented so far are mostly tailored towards the exploration
of an urban model from the model view. For tasks that have specific
search criteria, such as looking for areas with high percentages of cer-
tain ethnicities, we employ a simple slider to highlight the clusters that
match the given criterion (Figure 7).
As the user moves the slider, the model and data views update inter-
actively, highlighting the clusters that fulfill the criterion. To maintain
legibility, the other clusters are shown as well, but in a darker color.
4 APPLICATION SCENARIOS
In order for the participants of our study to understand how the ap-
plication might apply in real world settings, we provided them with
scenarios in which a user might interact with the urban visualization
tool. By using actual demographic data taken from the United States
Census 2000 [27] for the county of Mecklenburg in Charlotte, North
Carolina, we were able to apply the data to the 3D building layout
of the area. The demographics utilized in this specific demonstration
cover various categories such as ethnicity, citizenship, job status, in-
come, and housing statistics. However, the system is not limited to
these categories and is configurable to each user’s needs.
A simple scenario provided to the user allowed for an immediate
understanding of the possible everyday uses of the visualization tool.
For instance, according to the Director of the UNC Charlotte Urban In-
stitute, the city of Charlotte’s annual “Charlotte Neighborhood Qualify
of Life Study” looks for areas of high ethnic population with low levels
of income to identify possible improvements to these regions through
urban planning. Using our system, we can quickly identify the regions
in Charlotte that fit the two criteria (Figure 8). Furthermore, upon fur-
ther inspection, we identify that there are some characteristics of these
neighborhoods that are of interest to the UNC Charlotte Urban Insti-
tute. Specifically, by examining the parallel-coordinates, we find that
the level of Hispanic populations in these areas have a positive corre-
lation with the percentage of foreigners and the percentage of people
who rent housing (Figure 8). The relationships between these cate-
gories are not easily perceivable using current commercial software.
As the Director of Land Use and Environmental Planning Division
at UNC Charlotte said, “using current software requires going back
and forth between ten different windows to find these relationships,
whereas your system shows all those relationships in one simple view.”
Another real life example was given by a real estate developer at
Harris Associates. In his occupation, identifying areas with homo-
geneity in demographics is often very important when negotiating rad-
ical or new concepts in urban planning. In his experience, local gov-
ernments of areas with high homogeneity in demographics are more
likely to accept new concepts because of their shared demographic
background. However, areas with high heterogeneity often result in
disagreements between the different demographic groups due to their
differences in perspectives. Using our system, we allow the user to
quickly identify the level of homogeneity of downtown Charlotte ver-
sus the town of Davidson (20 miles north of Charlotte) where the com-
pany is located (Figure 9). The figure indicates that downtown Char-
lotte is heterogeneous in demographics and citizenship status, whereas
Davidson is much more homogeneous.
Fig. 8. Case study 1: Finding neighborhoods with high Hispanic population near the downtown area: (right) the user starts by putting the focal
point over the downtown region; (left) using brushing in the parallel coordinates window, the user highlights the regions that have high Hispanic
population. Notice the positive correlation between the Hispanic population, the percentage of foreigners, and the percentage of residents who rent
their housing in these selected areas.
Fig. 9. Case study 2: Showing the differences in the amount of homogeneity between downtown Charlotte (bottom) and the Davidson area.
(top) Davidson area: notice that the bars in the Data View are all approximately the same height around the red clusters, indicating that the
neighborhoods in the Davidson area tend to be more homogenized, whereas (b) in the downtown area of Charlotte, the differences between
surrounding neighborhoods are more apparent.
5 USER EVALUATION
We asked 14 expert users to evaluate our system from their own per-
spectives and identify the strengths and weaknesses of our system.
These 14 experts have disparate backgrounds, ranging from inde-
pendent real estate development, the Center for Real Estate at UNC
Charlotte, the UNC Charlotte Urban Institute, Charlotte Mecklen-
burg County Geographic Information Systems Office, Planning De-
partment, and School System. In the study, we first asked the experts
to fill out a pre-test questionnaire that identified their backgrounds in
urban studies and their proficiency levels with geographic information
systems. Then we demonstrated features of our system, followed by a
few simple scenarios in finding interesting characteristics of the cen-
sus data in Charlotte. After the demonstrations, we asked the experts
if our tool could be used in their areas of expertise. We concluded by
asking them to give feedback on the usefulness of the system as well
as any suggestions for future improvements. With their consent, the
users were tape-recorded during these sessions. Furthermore, all ex-
perts agreed to have their comments, names, and affiliations appear in
this publication.
Focus-Dependent and Dynamic Clusters
All but one expert agreed that the focus-dependent view with dynamic
clusters helps in understanding not just the region of interest, but also
its surrounding areas. A planning specialist of Charlotte Mecklen-
burg School System commented that using this technique would allow
her to focus on the potential sites of a new school, and still show the
“projections of future student populations based on surrounding new
residential developments.” Another planning expert continued to add,
“new housing developments often impact the existing school systems
in terms of student population and demographics” and implied that the
dynamic clustering helped in visualizing the changes and seeing the
potential new effects.
The one user who didn’t find this technique useful commented that
most projects he worked on had strict boundary requirements. With
these restrictions, it had never been necessary for him to examine sur-
rounding areas.
Integrated Displays
On the use of the two integrated views between the 3D Model View
and the Data View, 13 out of 14 of the participants found the com-
bination of the two to be useful. A senior systems analyst at Char-
lotte Mecklenburg County GIS Office attested that “[the integrated
displays] are an asset in handling large amounts of data and faster
user production rates because it provides a link between the 3D urban
model and the data display.” As the Director of the UNC Charlotte
Urban Institute succinctly put it, the dual views provided the “here’s
what I’m looking for, and there’s where it is” capability to understand-
ing urban data relationships.
The only expert who did not find the integrated displays to be use-
ful mentioned that GIS experts had been successful for years in us-
ing single displays and that having multiple screens sometimes caused
confusion in which screen to focus.
Multi-Dimension Visualization
Displaying multiple dimensions of data using the matrix view and the
parallel coordinates allow the user to quickly see relationships within
the urban data. A principal planner at the Charlotte Mecklenburg Plan-
ning Department asserted that “an asset to this visualization tool is that
the selection of data makes demographic relationships instantly appar-
ent in the area of specificity. In current systems, you have to design
[the necessary queries], analyze them, and then modify the queries to
find the correlations that you are looking for.” The director of Meck-
lenburg County GIS Services further added, “Sometimes users have
to go through a lot of different sources of data or running [statistical
analysis] to find relationships. Your tool is providing an on-the-fly,
interactive way of instantly noticing nearby statistical data and their
relationships.” All of our users shared the same sentiments and found
the Data View to be useful, although one user commented that the
Data View required some explanation before the relationships in the
data became apparent.
The Director of Land Use and Environmental Planning Division at
UNC Charlotte summarized the strengths of our system eloquently.
“Essentially what you are providing with this tool is a spatially sensi-
tive graphic display. The strength of this tool is the dynamic table that
displays areas in a spatially understandable way. In other software
systems, the user is required to scan the tabularly listed rows of a GIS
database, which gives no indication of the rows’ geospatial locations
or their relationships between one another. Another strong aspect is
the fact that your focus area and peripheral areas are cohesively orien-
tated. When that aspect is combined with the ability to change the level
of detail through clustering, the user gains a new dimension [of under-
standing]. Changing the level of detail in other software programs
becomes cumbersome from running [multiple repetitive] queries.”
Collectively, expert users saw the potentials of our system both aca-
demically and commercially. Academically, they recognized that our
system offered an entirely new perspective in studying urban land-
scapes and felt the tool provided them with vivid mental maps of their
own spatial awareness in an urban environment. Commercially, users
believed that this system can help increase productivity and provide
better execution of their daily tasks by substantially improving the way
they interact with GIS databases.
6 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
A few very interesting and important topics emerged from the discus-
sions with our expert users. The most controversial is the results of
dynamic clustering, on which we received informative but disparate
feedbacks. There are a few experts who found the clustering to be
confusing. Specifically, experts who work with the census data ex-
pected the clusters to follow the boundaries of the census tracts. Sim-
ilarly, experts who work with zip codes or school districts wanted to
see the clusters form boundaries and shapes that they are familiar with.
In contrast, other experts praised the results of the dynamic clusters as
the clusters provided “possibilities to new district boundaries” that one
might not have been aware of.
While all experts agree that they retain spatial understanding of the
city of Charlotte through all levels of simplification using our system,
the question of what makes an urban model legible remains open. The
one key point that everyone can can agree on is that the sense of leg-
ibility is very subjective and changes depending on each individual’s
level of understanding and perspective of a city. As mentioned be-
fore, urban experts with specific domain knowledge form their sense
of legibility based on their domain of expertise; residents of a city
orient themselves based on familiar establishments (such as a local
restaurant) that might not be visually or mentally important to others.
For tourists or visitors to a city, visually distinctive landmarks such as
skyscrapers or major roads are important features for understanding
the surroundings. Conversely, soldiers in an urban battlefield require
a different set of training and understanding of a city to effectively
communicate spatial relationships in a dynamic environment [19].
Although our approach uses geometry to create clusters that are
understandable to all users, we note that creating legible cities to users
of all backgrounds is not a trivial task and would require knowledge of
the user’s perspective of the city prior to creating the clusters. Finding
interactive methods so that these clusters could be tailored towards the
need of each individual user remains an important future direction of
research for us.
Another topic of discussion that was commented on by almost all
experts is the need to integrate data from different sources. For real
estate developers, seeing how commercial buildings and public estab-
lishments such as drug stores and schools intertwine with residential
neighborhoods is important in identifying the needs of the neighbor-
hoods. Members of the Charlotte Mecklenburg GIS Office noted that
seeing tax records of individual buildings on top of the Census data
would give better understanding of the economic development of the
city. Similarly, experts from the Charlotte Mecklenburg School system
would like to see Census information blended with crime statistics to
find better routes for students and school buses. Since our system per-
forms clustering on a per-building level, assigning specific properties
from different data types to each building is trivial. However, finding
the necessary data and identifying the best way to represent sometimes
conflicting sources of data requires more investigation. For example,
commercial districts without any residents would not have any census
information, and purely residential districts would not contain infor-
mation on economic growth of the area. Integrating these two orthog-
onal sources of data into a cohesive view is important in enhancing the
user’s ability in seeing the patterns and relationships between the data.
Along the same lines, many users noted that seeing temporal
changes in a city would be very interesting. While we agree that time
is a very relevant factor in urban visualization, the challenge lies in
the collection of data such that the 3D models of buildings and the
additional sources of data match both spatially and temporally.
Lastly, some experts suggested a potential use of this system out-
side of our original design goals. Members the UNC Charlotte Urban
Institute mentioned using our system as a tool to compare different
cities. Specifically, urbanists have widely accepted that Charlotte as
an emerging southern city has mimicked the growth of Atlanta due to
their similarities in locale and culture. It would be interesting to juxta-
pose the two cities in our system and see if such patterns of similarities
are apparent. On a local scale, independent real estate developers from
Harris Associates mentioned a similar use of our system. Namely, it
is important for developers to foresee pockets of potential growth in a
city. For any given developing region, if a developer can identify an-
other similar but already established region in the city, the developer
might be able to project the potential growths of the developing region
based on the history of the established one. Although the idea of using
our system as a predictive tool is still being investigated, we are very
excited about the potential benefits that it could bring.
7 CONCLUSION
We introduce an interactive tool to visualize an urban model in a focus
dependent and multi-resolution fashion both geometrically and con-
cerning the underlying data while retaining the legibility of the city.
Throughout the user’s exploration of the urban model, the system al-
lows the user to maintain spatial awareness of the focus area as well as
the peripheral areas.
Cohesively integrating the 3D Model View and the Data View al-
lows the user to see the relationships between the geospatial informa-
tion of the urban model with the related urban data such as the census
information. The Data View further shows multiple categories of data
in one glance, which is an improvement over existing commercial soft-
ware when exploring urban models as it helps the user to easily iden-
tify correlations between the categories.
As indicated by the experts in our user study, our system contains
features that fundamentally change the way users would interact with
urban data, which in turn enhances their ability to better understand
the urban model. With the addition of more task specific data, we look
forward to the expert users using our system in their daily tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Steve Ott, Jeff Michael, Victoria Bott, Char-
lynn Burd, Kurt Olmsted, Todd Wilson, Tobin Bradley, Andy Goretti,
Paul Martin, Lori Quinn, Christine Hamlett, Jennifer Dean, Ed Harris,
and David Stewart for their time, invaluable feedback and suggestions;
to Dale Loberger and Paul Gallimore of ESRI for their encouragement
and comments; and to Mohammad Ghoniem, XiaoYu Wang, Thomas
Butkiewicz, and Caroline Ziemkiewicz for proof reading the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Ahonen-Rainio. Concept testing of some visualization methods for
geographic metadata. In ScanGIS, pages 103–117, 2003.
[2] R. Chang, T. Butkiewicz, C. Ziemkiewicz, Z. Wartell, N. Pollard, and
W. Ribarsky. Hierarchical simplification of city models to maintain urban
legibility. In SIGGRAPH ’06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Sketches, page
130. ACM Press, 2006.
[3] R. Chang, T. Butkiewicz, C. Ziemkiewicz, Z. Wartell, N. Pollard, and
W. Ribarsky. Hierarchical simplification of city models to maintain ur-
ban legibility. Technical Report CVC-UNCC-06-01, Visualization Cen-
ter, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 2006.
[4] C. J. Chung, editor. Great Leap Forward. Taschen, 2001.
[5] G. Cullen. The Concise Townscape. Butterworth Architecture, 1961.
[6] M. de Smith, M. Goodchild, and P. Longley. Geospatial Analysis: A
comprehensive guide. Troubador Publishing Ltd, 2007.
[7] J. Dykes, A. MacEachren, and M. Kraak. Exploring Geovisualization.
Elsevier, 2005.
[8] R. Edsall. The parallel coordinate plot in action: Design and use for
geographic visualization. In Computational Statistics and Data Analysis,
volume 43, pages 605–619, 2003.
[9] ESRI. ArcGIS. http://www.esri.com/products.html, 2007.
[10] S. Fuhrmann, P. Ahonen-Rainio, R. Edsall, S. Fabrikant, E. Koua, C. To-
bon, C.Ware, and S. Wilson. Making userful and usable geovisualization:
Design and evaluation issues. In Exploring Geovisualization, 2005.
[11] M. Gahegan, M. Takatsuka, M. Wheeler, and F. Hardisty. Introducing
GeoVISTA Studio: an integrated suite of visualization and computational
methods for exploration and knowledge construction in geography. Com-
puters, Environment and Urban Systems, 26(4):267–292, 2002.
[12] M. Garland and Y. Zhou. Quadric-based simplification in any dimension.
In ACM Transaction on Graphics, Vol. 24, No. 2, pages 209–239. ACM,
2005.
[13] A. Garvin. The American City: What Works and What Doesn’t. McGraw
Hill, 2002.
[14] GRASS. GRASS GIS. http://grass.itc.it, 2007.
[15] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates: A tool for visualiz-
ing multi-dimensional geometry. In IEEE Visualization, pages 361–378.
IEEE CS Press, 1990.
[16] Intergraph. GeoMedia. http://www.intergraph.com/geomedia/, 2007.
[17] E. Koua, A. MacEachren, and M. Kraak. Evaluating the usability of visu-
alization methods in an exploratory geovisualization environment. In In-
ternational Journal of Geographical Information Science, volume 20(4),
pages 425–448, 2006.
[18] H. Lefebvre. The Production of Space. Blackwell, 1991.
[19] M. Livingston, L. Rosenblum, S. Julier, D. Brown, Y. Baillot, J. Swan,
J. Gabbard, and D. Hix. An augmented reality system for military op-
erations in urban terrain. In Proceedings of the Interservice / Industry
Training, Simulation, and Education Conference, page 89, 2002.
[20] K. Lynch. The Image of the City. The MIT Press, 1960.
[21] C. Mina. Mapinfo spatialware: A spatial information server for rdbms.
In 24th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, page 704.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1998.
[22] W. J. Mitchell. City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn. MIT Press,
1996.
[23] C. Rinner. A geographic visualization approach to multi-criteria evalu-
ation of urban quality of life. In International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, volume 21, pages 907–919, 2007.
[24] C. Rowe and F. Koetter. Collage City. MIT Press, 1978.
[25] P. Shanbhag, P. Rheingans, and M. desJardins. Temporal visualization
of planning polygons for efficient partitioning of geo-spatial data. In
Proceedings Information Visualization, pages 211–218. IEEE CS Press,
2005.
[26] C. Tobon. Evaluating geographic visualization tools and methods: An
approach and experiment based upon user tasks. In Exploring Geovisu-
alization, 2005.
[27] U.S. Census Bureau. United States 2000 Census. http://www.census.gov,
2000.
[28] C. Weaver. Building highly-coordinated visualizations in improvise. In
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualizaion, pages 159–166, 2004.
[29] C. Weaver. Improvisational geovisualization of the 2000 united states
census. In AutoCarto, 2006.
[30] C. Williamson and B. Shneiderman. The dynamic homefinder: Evaluat-
ing dynamic queries in a real-estate information exploration system. In
Proceedings Information Retrieval, pages 338–346. ACM Press, 1992.
[31] P. Wonka, M. Wimmer, and D. Schmalstieg. Visibility preprocessing
with occluder fusion for urban walkthroughs. In Proceedings of the Eu-
rographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques 2000, pages 71–82, Lon-
don, UK, 2000. Springer-Verlag.

