URBAN VISUALIZATION 1 
 
 
Urban Visualization:  
Urban Design and Computer Visualization  
Introduction 
Historically, the city represents not just a 
collection of buildings, but also the concrete 
cosmology of the world. The importance of the 
city wall was not only for defense, but also as 
an edge between the civilized and the wild, the 
known and the unknown. The city, in the form 
of the heavenly Jerusalem, had been the image 
of paradise itself, a perfected objects of human 
art. 
The importance of geometry in this historical 
context is that one can be assured that the 
form of the city will correspond to meaning. 
This is the canonical visualization method of 
city form, from the maps of Rome by 
Giambattista Nolli [18] to Collage City by Collin 
Rowe [19] to  the Capital Building in Dacca by 
Louis Kahn to (perhaps more surprisingly, 
given his futurist rhetoric) Chandigarh by Le 
Corbusier. 
Contemporary urban designers are confronted 
by cities with overlapping systems of 
movement and information that has made the 
reading of geometry insufficient for an 
understanding of the city. There is an active 
discussion about the role of the physical 
setting amid the proliferation of mobility and 
information.  
The authors of this paper have published work 
that demonstrates the application of urban 
design principles to problems of urban 
visualization. In general, the issues for urban 
visualization focus on two problems, intelligent 
graphics processing and very large data sets. 
One of us has published work demonstrating 
how Lynch’s principles from The Image of the 
City can be applied to the problem of applying 
intelligent algorithms to issues of computer 
graphics. We have together published work 
demonstrating how very large and disparate 
data sets can be visualized and integrated in 
unique ways. 
This paper is intended as a survey of urban 
design theory positions and their possible 
applicability to alternative conceptions of urban 
visualization. We anticipate using this survey 
as the basis for future work to generate new 
methods. 
We should be clear on several assumptions 
that we have made while assembling this 
survey. 
First, in this report, we are specifically 
interested in urban design rather than urban 
planning. Our working distinction between 
them is that planning is usually focused on 
policy issues while urban design is focused on 
the form of the city. While we will argue later 
for a method that combines both of these 
issues, we think it is useful to separate them 
for analytic purposes. 
Second, we do not intend for this to be an 
historical survey. We are interested in only 
those theories that specifically address ideas of 
legibility, which implies an interest in the 
existing fabric rather than in utopian solutions.  
Third, our interest is specifically concerned 
with the manner in which the insights and 
schemas of the theorists might be applied as 
principles for computer visualizations of 
complex urban environments. This requires an 
attempt to infer a method within each of the 
positions.  
1 Cognitive Mapping  
How do we mentally simplify complex urban 
environments? 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 2 
 
 
The cognitive mapping approach is based on 
the perceptual methods by which we structure 
and store spatial knowledge. E.C. Tolman 
(1948) introduced the idea of cognitive maps 
as a description of a general psychological 
process [24]. This approach is closely identified 
with Kevin Lynch, one of America’s most well 
known urban planners, who studied the city, 
concentrating on human perception and 
navigation. Lynch published The Image of the 
City (1960), centered on the idea of 
“imagablilty” which studies the perceptual 
elements of the city and their cognitive 
prominence.  
Lynch’s work provides basic techniques for 
understanding the mental map of the city 
through recognizing that the landscape has 
definable elements, which he identifies as 
paths, edges, districts, nodes, and landmarks 
[16]. These elements are descriptive of urban 
spatial organization and are a universal set of 
methods for navigating a city. He believes that 
these elements are also directly relate to the 
form, organization, and function of cities. 
Lynch studied cities with vastly different spatial 
organizations such as, Boston, Jersey City, and 
Los Angeles to test his method of visualizing 
form at an urban scale. Within his method, any 
city can be (and is) understood through these 
five elements.  
Lynch’s ideas of cognitive mapping are well 
developed for the reading of both existing 
urban visualization [26] and for virtual worlds 
[27]. The five elements identified by Lynch can 
each be implemented to parse complex urban 
models into cognitive units (Fig. 1). For 
example, districts can be identified both by the 
repetition of blocks or building geometries and 
by the complementary identification of edges. 
This approach emphasizes the planametric 
view; only the landmark element is three 
dimensional. The strength of this position is 
the use of predetermined elements that 
enables preprocessing a large-scale urban 
model for dynamic, interactive rendering [7]. 
Fig. 1 Diagram of cognitive mapping concepts. 
2 Experiential Approach  
How do the experiences of movement, 
uncovering, and texture make a city? 
Cities have sometimes been understood as a 
form of constructed landscape, a view that 
emphasizes the visual unfolding of the urban 
environment. This view is often associated with 
the picturesque both in garden design, and by 
extension, urban form. 
English architect Gordon Cullen exemplifies the 
experiential approach in his book Townscape 
(1961), a collection of images and essays that 
express the city through unfolding vision. Most 
of his examples are small English towns whose 
growth was incremental and circumstantial. 
Cullen conceptualized the city as a complex set 
of relationships. He argued that many 
elements go into the making of an 
environment; buildings, trees, nature, water, 
traffic, advertisements, etc. are woven 
together in such a way that drama is released 
[4]. He did not believe that understanding the 
city could be achieved through technical or 
scientific approaches, but it could be achieved 
through an understanding of vision.   
Cullen’s experiential approach uses three 
elements in order to analyze a complex 
environment or townscape: optics, place, and 
content. He introduces optics as the concept of 
serial vision in which movement at a uniformed 
speed through an environment both embraces 
an existing view and hints at possible emerging 
views in a series of “jerks and revelations” [9]. 
The movement through the urban environment 
produces a series of frames, each displaying a 
set of legible elements, which marks the 
locations of the “jerks and revelations”. Place 
refers to “plastic experience,” a journey 
through pressures and vacuums [4]. Cullen 
lists a set of qualities of a townscape that 
create a sense of place, such as, enclosure, 
gateway, change of level, narrowing, etc [9]. 
He describes this as “IT,” which we also 
understand as “HERE,” and “THERE,” relating 
to the ideas of space. For example, place is 
recognized when someone is standing on the 
edge of a cliff or inside a tunnel. Content refers 
to the surface of place that contains visual 
organization through style, texture, material, 
and color. Cullen’s introduction of texture is 
unique; it is not a common topic among other 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 3 
 
 
urban theorists; he relates this to an emotional 
reaction to the city through aesthetics.  
Our interest in Cullen for urban visualization 
centers on two aspects of his work. One is the 
interest in serial vision, and the other, 
connection of vision and place. These show 
promise of being a useful tool to conceptualize 
urban space using “fly-throughs” and other 
animation tools. The other aspect of focus is 
“content”, which we take to mean as texture in 
an urban visualization. Some work has been 
done on urban modeling [25], but we believe it 
may be possible to use texture as more than 
an afterthought for modeling. This would 
require the generation of procedural mapping 
strategies that apply at an urban scale.  
Fig. 2 A diagram of this experiential approach 
involving the modeling of space (rather than solid) 
and the generation of surface maps. 
3 Rules Approach  
How can one principle be iteratively applied to 
all levels of the city? 
Often urban theorists construct a set of rules 
or principles that are descriptive of the city. 
The rules can apply to a multitude of elements 
at various scales.  
Architect Christopher Alexander was educated 
in mathematics and architecture at Cambridge. 
The combination of disciplines is evident in 
much of his work. His first book, Notes on the 
Synthesis of Form (1964), explicitly deals with 
the application of mathematics and computers 
to design. A Pattern Language (1977), while it 
recants any interest in computers, 
nevertheless offers a knowledge-based 
approach to towns, buildings, and construction 
[1]. A New Theory of Urban Design (1987) 
addresses the question of how we can create 
built environments that embody the quality of 
“wholeness” evident in traditional towns and 
settlements [10]. While it is more than a little 
hard to give a single definition to what 
Alexander means by wholeness, he seems to 
be interested in elements at all scales in the 
urban environment. His book attempts to 
recapture the process of how cities develop 
organically and maintain a quality of wholeness 
in an organized manner. 
Alexander’s concepts contribute to urban 
legibility through his “Seven Rules of Detailed 
Growth” which apply directly to elements in all 
levels of the built environment [2]. The rules 
are 
• Piecemeal growth 
• Growth of larger wholes 
• Vision of growth 
• Positive urban space 
• Large building restates urban context 
• Construction reinforces whole 
• “Centers” created at all scales 
To test his rules he applied them to an area in 
San Francisco where he wanted to create 
wholeness in the built environment.   
This recursive approach to analyzing levels of 
the environment allows people to see the 
environment not as one whole entity but as 
sets of relationships. Yet, it is clear that for 
Alexander these relationships in each level of 
the environment are seen in all other levels.  
Ironically, we will be turning Alexander’s ideas 
back to computers and trying to apply these 
ideas to urban visualization. The central idea 
may be the idea of recursion, which is at least 
implicit in his late writing on urbanism. The 
idea that rules applied at all scales may form a 
powerful tool to a method of urban 
visualization (Fig. 3). It may be that fractal 
math offers some opportunities, where the 
operations work at all scales. 
Fig. 3 Diagram of a generative system using 
recursion. 
4 Typological Approach  
How do individual buildings or spaces grow into 
a city? 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 4 
 
 
The typological approach begins with the 
premise that cities are built from individual 
pieces of architecture, each of which is 
established by a building type that includes 
aspects of space, construction, circulation and 
grouping. This approach is based on an 
understanding of type that includes both this 
idea of building type as well as ideas about 
typologies of public space. 
 
Aldo Rossi, in The Architecture of the City,  
explains the city as a gigantic man-made 
object composed of artifacts. Rossi is pointing 
to the stubborn persistence of the buildings of 
a city, that have been adapted to new uses but 
continue as a kind of permanent stage. He 
states, “Cities are in reality great camps of the 
living and the dead where many elements 
remain like signals, symbols, cautions. When 
the holiday is over, what remains of the 
architecture is scarred, and the sand consumes 
the street again [17].” 
Rossi conceptualizes the city as an “urban 
science,” one entity comprised of many parts 
that create the city as a whole that can only be 
achieved through years of growth [17]. He 
introduces the element of time that is unique 
for urban theorists. He says the city will 
constantly change and transform through time, 
but the concept of a particular city will be 
founded on our memories [4]. He notes 
particular architectural “facts,” such as 
monuments that will be the focus of our 
memory and are essential for giving meaning 
to the city. 
Rossi reads the urban environment through the 
way buildings, neighborhoods, and districts 
were formed. He created a typological system 
based on how structures have common 
characteristics. First, he categorized the kinds 
of buildings into types (such as libraries or 
schools) and then established laws based on 
their fundamental method of construction. 
From these laws, he established further laws 
by which building types are grouped. For 
example, a single family home can be 
categorized as a type, and it is understood 
through a set of laws, applied to individual 
cases and to groupings  
Concepts of typologies in a city are also 
apparent in Urban Space (1979) by Robert 
Krier, which focuses on a thorough analysis of 
typologies of urban spaces. 
Krier’s view of typologies is a bit different than 
Rossi’s view. He concentrated on typologies of 
public space rather building types. Krier 
believes the physical form of the city is 
determined by the relationships between the 
streets and the open spaces, the elevations 
and sections that enclose them [4] leading to 
volumetric and 3-D understanding of the city. 
It is by studying these elements of urban space 
that a series of typologies may be generated. 
The typologies originate from three main 
forms: square, circular, or triangular. Through 
a diagrammatic process, Krier makes various 
adjustments to the forms. For example, he 
says the forms can be independent or work 
together; they can transform through 
processes, such as addition, overlapping, and 
penetrating, etc [15].  
Both Rossi and Krier suggest approaches that 
begin with an instance and then build toward 
an overall idea of the city. While Rossi’s 
emphacizes building type and Krier public 
space, both build recursively from individual 
instances to the city as a whole (Fig. 4). The 
recursive nature of both approaches may fit 
well with ideas of shape grammar [25, 28]. 
There remains questions concerning how to 
extend the idea of grammar past the individual 
building to complex urban form. 
 
Fig. 4 Diagram of typological system. 
5 Space Syntax  
How do human occupation and culture connect 
through space? 
Space syntax is a method pioneered by Bill 
Hillier with Julienne Hanson and the Space 
Snytax Laboratory at the University College 
London and in his books, A Social Logic of 
Space (1984) and Space in the Machine 
(1966). This approach attempts to use precise 
mathematical notation to connect human 
occupation and space. Hillier’s ideas of spatial 
patterns focus on measuring movement 
(pedestrian and automobile) and urban grid 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 5 
 
 
configuration influence. Hillier was also 
interested in how various societies adopt 
different spatial forms. 
Space syntax utilizes three basic conceptions 
of space: isovist, meaning the view from any 
particular point; axial space, referring to a 
straight line or possible path; and convex 
space, describing an occupyable void. 
Interestingly, these concepts map cleanly to 
the compositional ideas of point, line and 
space.  
Much of the analysis using this method 
involves using graph theory or a variant as a 
method of mapping the geometric structure 
onto a planar dual of human use. This 
procedure involves beginning with a town map, 
generating a convex map of spaces, and then 
axial map of routes through the spaces based 
on movement and view. The graphs can then 
be analyzed for both connectivity (the number 
of adjacent elements) and integration (both 
local and global). 
The space syntax method is often linked to the 
study of urban morphology, which examines 
various structures embedded within the city. 
Hillier’s Space in the Machine (1996) presents 
many examples of space syntax used as a 
method generate morphological views of urban 
structure for further analysis [11]. 
This method has been used as a way of 
conceptualizing large-scale virtual urban 
environments (Fig. 5) [8]. We believe it is 
reasonable to believe that it can be extended 
to other realms of Human Computer 
Interfaces. 
 
Fig. 5 Diagram of space syntax. 
6 City.org  
How do non-physical networks interact with 
city form? 
The city has been transformed by the increase 
of information and digital technology. We need 
new methods to read the urban environment 
that recognized the shift in roles of urban 
geometry and the flow of information. 
Robert Venturi , in Learning from Las Vegas 
(1972), studies the Las Vegas strip both for its 
architecture and for its use of signage as an 
equivalent to architecture. Venturi noted that 
the contemporary city was evolving to respond 
to widespread use of the automobile, and the 
way people read, understand, and navigate the 
new city. Based on his interest in iconology as 
a historical method, he reads Las Vegas as a 
place filled with symbolism, signs, and 
information that creates a city that can be 
described as architecture of communication 
over space [23]. Space, scale, speed, and 
symbol were used to analyze the roadside 
architecture of Las Vegas, and were given 
equal importance with the more conventional 
analysis of geometric and planametric form. 
Venturi et al. noted, in Las Vegas, the 
important relationship is between the signs, 
which have dominance over space. 
Venturi is one of the first architects to 
understand that the city is changing into a 
place full of information. He sees the city as a 
place that communicates with new media and 
reminds us that technological advancements 
(although in his case not yet digital) have 
recontexturalized our city.   
Rem Koolhaas’ books, S, M, L, XL (1995) and 
Mutations (2001) discuss how communication 
networks and economic forces affect the 
physical environment. Rem Koolhaas relates 
architecture and the city to current social, 
economic, and cultural issues. His work often 
reflects global issues and their transformations 
of the city. [20]. The purpose is to extrapolate 
possible futures for the city based on current 
trends. Koolhaas uses new graphic design 
languages to represent the city; 
representations of the city involve such 
mappings as the annual sales volume per 
square foot for retail space across a region, or 
the locations of cell phone towers, or a record 
of the total number of images viewed in one 
day. The research presents cities not as an 
architecturally neat system, but as a 
sometimes chaotic series of shifts, overlaps, 
and displacements of layers [22]. 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 6 
 
 
Stan Allen’s book Points and Lines: Diagrams 
and Projects for the City  deals most explicitly 
with the implications of digital technologies and 
their impact on architecture and the city. While 
he cites critics who believe that architecture 
will fade away under the advance of 
technology, Allen’s view is that the physicality 
of architecture will continue to distinguish it 
from other media, although it will be 
transformed. His view of that transformation is 
based on an idea of field theory that sees 
architecture not as an isolated object of 
geometric perfection, but rather as the result 
of the flow and overlap of forces, many of 
them extending beyond the physical site of a 
single building [29].  
The implication for urban visualization is that 
urban visualization will not be only concerned 
with geometries, but rather with a series of 
overlapping fields (Fig. 5b). The work by 
Chang on urban simplification uses building 
height as an indicator of “monument status” in 
exactly this sense [7], and in contrast to the 
simple gestalt properties of the other Lynchian 
aspects. 
Fig. 5b Diagram of City.org concepts. 
7 Urban Visualization 
There has been a history of using architectural 
theories in computer graphics and 
visualization. From building virtual worlds, 
creating plausible 3D building models and 
cities, navigating virtual environments to 
investigating street patterns and exploring 
abstract data spaces, computer researchers 
have utilized various architectural theories to 
make the visualization believable and pleasing. 
Due largely to the disciplinary differences 
between urban design and computer science, 
our goal is to find parallels between the steps 
of building an urban visualization system and 
urban theories, suggesting how they could be 
applied to enhance or guide such systems. The 
specific interpretation and transformation of 
the abstract qualitative urban theories into 
tangible running algorithms is still an open 
area of research. One of the most rewarding 
aspects of this joint research is the calibration 
of the needs of each discipline for both broad 
overview and precise quantification. 
Returning to the issues raised in the 
introduction, it is our belief that urban theories 
can inform urban visualization both as a 
method of informing generation and run-time 
simplification of 3D geometric modeling and in 
managing information visualization overlay 
issues for the very large, over-lapping data 
sets. 
7.1 3D Geometric Modeling 
Creating believable 3D geometric urban model 
is essential to an urban visualization system. 
Work by Rossi and Krier both focus on 
understanding the relationships between 
individual pieces of architecture and the city. 
Depending on the building type, space, 
construction, circulation, and grouping, each 
piece of architecture dictates its surrounding 
typology. Using Rossi and Krier’s theories, 
neighborhoods can be generated with 
believable buildings of various sizes and 
shapes. 
The buildings generated based on Rossi and 
Krier’s approach need to be bounded by streets 
and paths, which can be created using Hillier’s 
theory of Space Syntax. By examining axial 
lines, roads can be created such that an equal 
balance of connectivity and integration is 
maintained throughout the city. 
Alexander’s theory of urban design 
encompasses elements of an urban 
environment on all scales. The rules that he 
created regarding “wholeness” can be 
recursively applied from a single building, a 
district, to an entire city. In constructing a 3D 
model of a city, the recursive nature of 
Alexander’s theory can help add meaning to 
the urban model on all scales such that a 
minor change to the creation of the buildings 
will appear in all levels of the city. 
7.2 Run-time Model Simplification 
A large urban model containing millions of 
polygons is still difficult to render in real time 
with the latest technologies. For interactive 
visualization of such large urban models, run-
time model simplification is essential. 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 7 
 
 
The principal behind model simplification is to 
reduce the geometric detail on the least 
important aspects of the model. This principal 
coincides with Sitte’s differentiation between 
“artistic” models from the economic ones. 
Using Sitte’s theory, the run-time model 
simplification can more aggressively remove 
details from the economic models since they 
are of less importance of the city. The artistic 
models should contain more geometric detail in 
most situations as they visually define the 
general feel of the city. 
Lynch’s notion of landmarks serves as a similar 
guideline to Sitte’s artistic models. Since the 
elements of legibility as described by Lynch are 
based on residents’ mental map of an urban 
environment, these legibility elements are 
indications of the levels of importance of the 
architectural pieces within a city. According to 
Lynch, for as long as these legibility elements 
are preserved during simplification, individuals’ 
mental map of the city would remain. 
While Sitte and Lynch’s theories address the 
geometric importance of urban buildings, 
Cullen’s experiential approach to an urban 
environment concentrates on the preservation 
of the textures of buildings. Although 
simplification of geometry in a visualization 
system is important, appropriately removing 
textures can drastically improve the 
performance of a visualization system. Using 
Cullen’s theory, for as long as the simplification 
of texture can maintain the sense of “IT, HERE, 
and THERE,” the visualization system can 
remove the redundant details in the textures. 
7.3 Information Visualization Overlay 
Informative labeling with either text or icons 
can help orient the user of an urban 
visualization system, but too many labels and 
the screen is cluttered and the underlying 
model becomes difficult to see. On the other 
hand, too few labels and it becomes difficult for 
the user to recognize areas of the city. 
Venturi’s study of signs and symbols in Las 
Vegas can serve as a guideline to the 
appropriate amount of labels used in a 
visualization system. Buildings with noticeable 
geometry or texture (symbols) do not require 
the additional labels; whereas indistinguishable 
buildings or groups of buildings can be 
identified through the use of legible labeling. 
Although labeling of individual buildings is 
relevant, it is often more useful to label an 
entire area within a city. This can be 
accomplished by either showing the name of 
the area, or by abstractly representing the 
area using glyphs similar to that of Koolhaas’s 
graphic design language. Furthermore, as the 
physical aspects of architecture begin to 
integrate with digital technologies, these labels 
of buildings or regions can begin to depict 
other aspects such as function or use as 
suggested by Allen. 
Notes 
1 Christopher Alexander, Sara Ishikawa, and 
Murray Silverstein, A Pattern Language: 
Towns, Buildings, Construction (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1977). 
2 Christopher Alexander and others, A New 
Theory of Urban Design (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1987). 
3 American Planning Association APA (accessed 
5 May 2007); available from 
http://www.planning.org/25anniversary/ 
influentials.htm, Internet. 
4 Geoffrey Broadbent, Emerging Concepts of 
Urban Space Design (London: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 1990). 
5 Eamonn Canniffe, Urban Ethic: Design in the 
Contemporary City (United Kingdom: 
Routledge, 2005). 
6 Remco Chang and others, “Legible Cities: 
Focus Dependent Multi-resolution Visualization 
of Urban Relationships,” Proceedings IEEE 
Visualization 2007 Conference, (2007). 
7 Remco Chang and others, “Hierarchical 
Simplification of City Models to Maintain Urban 
Legibility,” International Conference on 
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques 
130, ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Sketches, (2006). 
8 Ruth C. Dalton, “Is Spatial Intelligibility 
Critical to the Design of Largescale Virtual 
Environments?” International Journal of Design 
Computing 4, (2003). 
9 Gordon Cullen, The Concise Townscape (New 
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1975). 
URBAN VISUALIZATION 8 
 
 
10 Christopher Alexander and others, “A New 
Theory of Urban Design,” review of A New 
Theory of Urban Design, by Besim S. Hakim, 
ACSA: Journal of Architectural Education, 
1984, vol. 44(2): 120-123.  
11 Bill Hillier, Space is the Machine (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996). 
12 Bill Hillier and Julienne Hanson, The Social 
Logic of Space (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1984). 
13 Rem Koolhaas and others, Mutations: 
Harvard Project on the City (Barcelona: 
ACTAR, 2000). 
14 Rem Koolhaas and Bruce Mau, Small, 
Medium, Large, Extra-Large (New York: The 
Monacelli Press, Inc., 1998). 
15 Robert Krier, Urban Space (New York: Rizzoli 
International Publications, Inc., 1979). 
16 Kevin Lynch, The Image of the City 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960). 
17 Aldo Rossi, The Architecture of the City 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982). 
18 Giambattista Nolli, Nolli Map, 1748 (Nuova 
pianta di Roma data in luce da Giambattista 
Nolli l'anno MDCCXLVII). 
19 Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter, Collage City 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1978). 
20 Li  Shiqiao, ed., Folio 06: Documents of NUS 
Architecture (Singapore: Singapore University 
Press, 2005).  
21 Camillo Sitte, The Art of Building Cities (New 
York: Reinhold Publishing Corporation: 1945). 
22 Rem Koolhaas and others, “Mutations: 
Harvard Project on the City,” review of 
Mutations: Harvard Project on the City, by 
James Soane, http://www.ribabookshops.com, 
(2007). 
23 Robert Venturi, Denise S. Brown, and Steven 
Izenour, Learning form Las Vegas: The 
Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977). 
24 Edward C. Tolman, “Cognitive Maps in Rats 
and Man,” Psychological Review 55, (1948): 
189-208. 
25 Pascal Müller and others, “Image-based 
Procedural Modeling of Facades,” Proceedings 
of SIGGRAPH 2007 26, no. 3 (2007).  
26 Rudolph Darken and John L. Sibert, 
“Navigating Large Virtual Spaces,”  
International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction 8, no. 1 (1996): 49-72. 
27 Rob Ingram and Steve Benford, “The 
Application of Legibility Techniques to Enhance 
3-D Information Visualizations,” The Computer 
Journal 39, no. 10 (1996): 819-836. 
28 Bill Mitchell, The Logic of Architecture 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990). 
29 Stan Allen, Points and Lines: Diagrams and 
Projects for the City (New York: Princeton 
Architectural Press, 1999). 
30 Torsten Blume and Gregor Langenbrink, ed.,   
DOT.CITY (Berlin: Jovis, 2004). 
31 William J. Mitchell, City of Bits (Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1995).  
32 William J. Mitchell, Placing Words: Symbols, 
Space, and the City (Cambridge: MIT Press, 
2005). 
33 William J. Mitchell, The Logic of Architecture: 
Design, Computation, and Cognition 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

