Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 1
Designing Knowledge-Assisted Visual Analytics Systems for
Organizational Environments
Xiaoyu Wang 1,Thomas Butkiewicez1, Wenwen Dou1, Eric Bier2, and William Ribarsky1
1University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
2Palo Alto Research Center
Abstract
We present research focused on designing knowledge-assisted visual analytics systems for workers in organiza-
tional environments. We focus on business analysts and asset managers, who work collaboratively to analyze
information and make decisions. Through extensive investigations in two organizational environments, we found
that these knowledge workers struggle with managing and analyzing information from multiple perspectives. Their
current tools lack support for aggregating, organizing, and sharing such information. To address their needs, we
characterized their analytic workflows, extracted specific key knowledge actions for each task commonly found
in these workflows, and designed and evaluated two visual analytics systems that support and encapsulate these
knowledge actions. We provide design guidelines that should be used when designing knowledge-assisted visual
analytics systems, and illustrate their effectiveness with two systems built by following them.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications—
1. Introduction
We present the design for knowledge-assisted visual ana-
lytics systems in organizational environments. Our targeted
users are business analysts and asset managers, who com-
prise the task force that handles information analysis and
decision-making for companies and government agencies.
These knowledge workers focus on fusing multiple streams
of data, retrieving information for context-dependent tasks,
analyzing and sharing their findings, and finally collaborat-
ing with others to reach business decisions.
Various systems have been developed to provide data ma-
nipulation and information analysis [IBM] [AG]. However,
as Gile et al. [GRMT04] pointed out, a major shortcom-
ing of these systems is that they do not associate informa-
tion analysis with the analytical process, and are therefore
limited in providing context for decision-making. Bucher et
al. [BGS09] further suggested that information analysis is
generally isolated from the knowledge worker’s analytical
workflow, leaving a significant amount of data and informa-
tion detached from an interpretation context. Therefore, it is
necessary to design a system tailored to these professionals’
workflows, while supporting more systematic and purpose-
ful information analyses.
Following Zimmerman et al.’s [ZFE07] definition of de-
sign research, instead of intending to produce a commercial
product, we focus on producing design considerations that
support the analytical process within a knowledge-assisted
visual analytics system. We consolidate the resulting design
considerations into more general guidelines, which can be
applied to the wide range of visual analytics applications
currently being developed and deployed in today’s organi-
zational environments.
Our design study was conducted through extensive collab-
oration with two groups of knowledge workers. From them,
we learned their actual analysis needs and workflows, and
with them, we concurrently designed prototype systems to
iteratively identify tangible design considerations for their
user class.
This work makes three primary contributions: We present
a characterization of the analytical workflow of knowledge
workers and key knowledge actions that are required to per-
form individual tasks in the workflow. We describe design
guidelines for visual analytics systems that facilitate the
workflow through support for the above key knowledge ac-
tions. Finally, to illustrate the effectiveness of our guidelines,
we introduce and evaluate two systems designed using them
as a basis. (Further details on the architectures and imple-
mentations of these systems can be found in our companion
papers [WJB10] [WDC?10].)
We grounded our design based on studies with two groups
of professionals in different organizational settings: bridge-
asset managers in The U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion, who propose and execute strategic bridge maintenance
plans; and business analysts from Xerox, who retrieve and
analyze documents for information essential to the opera-
tion of the business. We closely examined these users’ ana-
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 2
lytic workflows and interviewed them to learn the knowledge
work required for achieving each analytical task. In general,
members from both groups must utilize and analyze infor-
mation from multiple channels, and are required to gener-
ate shared products effectively (e.g., a maintenance proposal
or analytical report). Subsequently, they need to coordinate
with multiple colleagues in different locations to agree on
strategic decisions.
Specifically, we identified six task activities essential for
these professionals’ decision-making workflows. As shown
in Figure 1, these six tasks are recurrent and central in
jobs involving foraging and organizing relevant information,
and enable these workers to update statuses and coordinate
progress with other individuals and groups. Currently, these
tasks are handled dispersedly in an individual’s workflow
with little support for systematically aggregating, organiz-
ing, or analyzing the information.
In the following sections, we present the procedures and
findings of our characterization for this domain, and its re-
lated analytical workflows. We describe the use of action-
able knowledge (Section 3.3) to transform the tasks found in
these workflows into tangible visual analytics design guide-
lines. These design guidelines include requirements that sup-
port the essential analytic tasks, as well as advanced func-
tions. Finally, we evaluate two systems designed with these
guidelines in mind.
2. Characterizing Organizational Analytics Processes
To produce appropriate design guidelines for an effective
knowledge-assisted visual analytics system, we closely stud-
ied our targeted knowledge workers and characterized their
domain-specific analytical processes. As shown in previ-
ous research [NE00] [CKH?10], an organizational analyt-
ical task is a process of handling multiple channels of in-
formation through the utilization of trained knowledge and
current resources. Characterizing the analytical process in an
organizational setting, such as a company or a governmental
agency, is a complex process and requires commitment from
all parties to maintain long-term collaboration.
We are very appreciative to our collaborators from US-
DOT and Xerox Corporation for their devotion to helping
us pursue our research goals and generously providing in-
valuable resources. Both organizations granted us the oppor-
tunity for close, in-depth interactions with their knowledge
workers and to conduct surveys and interviews, which were
crucial in studying their analytic processes. With the input
we collected, we were able to create schematics detailing
their workflows and identify the analytical tasks used in each
organization.
Our design study involved two separate investigations
with knowledge workers from each of the two organizations.
Participants varied in number, depending on the availability
of these busy professionals at each time. During each investi-
gation, data was collected using online questionnaires and/or
semi-structured interviews. The data collected was used to
characterize these workers’ task activities within analytical
processes, and further used to develop the design require-
ments for a knowledge-assisted visual analytics system. In
the following sections, we describe the procedures and re-
sults for each investigation:
2.1. Depicting Tasks in Bridge Maintenance Process
Starting in January 2008, our university formed a research
partnership with the USDOT and The North Carolina State
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) to investigate novel
approaches in assisting the bridge management process. One
of our first actions under this research partnership was to
conduct a nation-wide survey [WDC?10] regarding profes-
sional profiles, tool usage, and tool preferences. The surveys
were designed to provide a baseline and statistics for com-
parisons between normal tools used in bridge management,
and to identify potential areas for improvement.
Thirty-five out of the 50 state DOTs responded to our sur-
vey. The results clearly indicated that current bridge man-
agement systems are often insufficient in supporting effec-
tive bridge analysis. Almost all the responding states ex-
pressed the need to have a management system that would
enable them to be more effective at analyzing their bridges,
and that such a system needs to be customizable to assist
their individual workflows.
Based on their feedback, we further conducted semi-
structured interviews with bridge managers on a regular ba-
sis (every two weeks), in order to iteratively identify and pro-
pose features that can better support their analyses. Through
our interviews, we learnt that bridge maintenance workflow
is a process of deciding the severity, trending, relevance, and
benefits of maintenance work on specific bridges, as well
across as entire networks of bridges. Bridge managers hold
the role of knowledge manager and are attuned to informa-
tion analysis and sharing practices.
As shown in Figure 2, the first essential analytical task
in the bridge analysis process is to gather all the relevant
data about a particular bridge, including any known dam-
age, previous maintenance history, and typical deterioration
patterns of the materials involved. Bridge managers then an-
alyze the obtained information, identify any need for mainte-
nance, and write up proper maintenance plans. We also note
that bridge managers often need to develop their own cus-
tom analysis routines. Depending on available resources, a
bridge manager’s strategy can be very different from their
peers’, requiring a different combination of the above analy-
sis processes. In addition, sometimes even a single manager
needs to utilize multiple alternative analytical approaches
due to changes in priorities. At the heart of these individ-
ual routines are different combinations and sequences of the
above analytical processes. Therefore, it is important for a
system to provide bridge managers with the flexibility to
combine and sequence these analytical processes to fit their
own, customized workflows.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 3
Figure 1: An overview for our design guidelines. An organizational workflow is characterized into six common task activities.
Each activity is disseminated into fine-grained actionable knowledge. VA design guidelines are consolidated by transforming
this actionable knowledge into practical functions. Note: Given the different degree of completeness, only a subset of the listed
actionable knowledge is typically used in accomplishing each task.
2.2. Understanding Business Information Analysis
We further carried our momentum and analysis methodolo-
gies into our project with Xerox Corporation in the sum-
mer of 2009. In an organizational environment, such as Xe-
rox, employees’ document-centric activities result in the cre-
ation of many diverse information streams, including email
threads, calendar entries, web browsing histories, and ver-
sions of office documents. Many of these documents contain
information essential to the operation of the business, such as
project proposals and emails capturing product discussions.
Thus, our goal in this project is to investigate and design a
system that is effective to assist corporate employees in both
managing these information streams, and extracting desired
business information from them.
To understand this particular information analysis pro-
cess, we conducted 30 semi-structured interviews with Xe-
rox employees. The interviewees held a broad range of po-
sitions, including product researchers who needed to write
proposals and research papers, managers who were in charge
of business planning and marketing, and administrative staff
members who oversee hiring. These interviews were de-
signed to provide us with baseline statistics about the gen-
eral information analysis methods that were being used in
managing business information.
The results of our interviews showed that the most chal-
lenging problems for the corporate employees was handling
large amounts of content and, more importantly, managing
information from multiple channels simultaneously.
As shown in Figure 2, the analytical tasks of finding busi-
ness information often include content aggregation, informa-
tion organization and correlation, and sharing and collabora-
tion. To analyze certain business information, an employee
often starts with aggregating content, such as possibly rele-
vant documents, into a single location. They will then filter
this large collection of data, and attempt to organize it in a
clear and consistent manner to support the awareness and
sensemaking process. We noticed that sharing their analysis
findings and providing status updates are crucial activities
in these employees’ workflows. Because most current tools
lack support for these critical functions, employees will of-
ten resort to paper formats or email to communicate with
other colleagues about the business information which they
have found or their need for help finding it.
2.3. Identifying Six Common Task Activities in
Organizational Analytics Processes
To further characterize the common task activities found
within an organizational environment, we consult the Think
Loop model [PC05], grounding the usage of visual analytics
in a theory of information flows through the users’ analy-
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 4
Figure 2: This chart describes the workflow in each organizational environment. (Top) The six task activities common to both
organizational analysis processes. (Middle) A typical analytical workflow for bridge maintenance planning. (Bottom) A typical
analytical workflow for a business information analyst.
sis processes. We found that, while different organizations
shared diverse tasks, each’s analytical processes constituted
a series of similar, loosely defined, and collaborative task ac-
tivities. Knowledge workers accomplished analytical goals
via subtasks, had focused targets, and accessed a range of
services and resources [GIAH09]. As shown in Figure 2, we
identified six task activities common to organizational anal-
ysis processes:
• Content Gathering and Aggregation: Knowledge workers
identify appropriately-scoped content to form basic ana-
lytical contributions. They seek and extract information
from multiple channels relevant to the analytical tasks.
• Content Filtering and Customization: Knowledge work-
ers use filtering to familiarize themselves with content
they have collected. They also personalize the analysis en-
vironment in which this content is filtered.
• Content Organization and Information Analysis: Knowl-
edge workers organize the collected content and examine
it from multiple perspectives to look for data patterns and
desired information.
• Evidence Collection and Hypothesis Generation: Knowl-
edge workers create hypotheses regarding their analyses,
and collect related supporting evidence.
• Report Generation and Status Update: Knowledge work-
ers increase visibility to others regarding analysis status,
by providing notification and updates on the progress of
their analyses,
• Post-Analysis and Summarization: Knowledge workers
focus on validating project achievements and introspect-
ing workflows, after accomplishing an analytics process.
3. Transforming Organizational Analysis Process into
Visual Analytics Design
Designing a knowledge-assisted visual analytics system re-
quires supporting the analytical workflows of the knowledge
workers. While the aforementioned task activities are use-
ful in describing a general analytic process, they are often
too general to provide any specific guidelines in actual sys-
tem designs. Therefore, the first step in our design research
was to search for tangible artifacts that could help break-
down these high-level semantic tasks. These target artifacts
must meet two basic requirements: (1) they need to be con-
crete enough for practical visual analytics system designs,
and more importantly (2) they must be consumable for the
knowledge workers, who need to decide how to make use
of them, without introducing a considerable cognitive over-
head.
3.1. In Search of Tangible Design Artifacts
Many approaches have been used to denote such artifacts.
We examined previous research in the intelligence analy-
sis and knowledge management communities, and focused
on understanding the use of the knowledge process (e.g.
knowledge creation, consumption, and transfer) within the
analytical process. Similar to Heuer’s [Heu07] perspective
on knowledge as a dynamic expectation of information, we
emphasize the importance of knowledge actions to support
the transitions between different analytical task stages, and
further integration within the analytical process as a whole.
In addition, Nonaka et al. [IH95] also explored the general
knowledge conversion processes that can guide design of or-
ganizational decision support systems. Again, these knowl-
edge processes are too high-level to be useful in directing a
specific design for a visual analytic system.
Enlightened by the Theory of Action [AS92], we followed
Anrigyri et al.’s definition, and described our target artifacts
as a series of Actionable Knowledge. Actionable knowl-
edge is explicit symbolic knowledge,typically presented in
the form of tradeoffs for action or rules [MMG02], which
allows the decision maker to recognize some important re-
lations and perform an action, such as targeting a direct
marketing campaign, or planning infrastructure maintenance
aimed at reparing those assets with lowest health. The nature
of actionable knowledge fits well with our two requirements
in that: (1) it represents the fine-grained elements of each
analytical task, and thus is quite instructive for the design
of a knowledge assisted visual analytics system; (2) it is ex-
tracted from domain users’ knowledge actions, and therefore
can be consumed without additional cognitive overhead.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 5
3.2. Representing Organizational Analytics Processes
using Actionable Knowledge
As illustrated in [AS92] [BGS09] [CS04], there are many
approaches to model actionable knowledge. Given our ad-
vantage of a close working relationship with actual domain
users, we adopted the domain-driven modeling process, and
grounded our search for actionable knowledge on the inter-
views and surveys with our two interviewee groups.
During the interviews, we asked the participants to envi-
sion the hypothetical process of carrying out their usual tasks
with their regular tools and working environments. We en-
couraged them to also think about additional functions that
might be useful but not yet available in any of the tools they
typically used. Specifically, we asked our participants about
the fine-grained knowledge actions they used in their daily
practices, the essential tools they have, and how they utilized
these tools to execute each action. In doing so, we were able
to identify key actionable knowledge that a tool should sup-
port to improve productivity and reduce workload.
In their responses, our interviewees expressed the impor-
tance of actionable knowledge to the organizational deci-
sion making process. In their analytical process, actionable
knowledge is followed to respond to different situations, and
illuminates potential action paths for overcoming obstacles.
The use of actionable knowledge further directs these profes-
sionals to discover certain information or data patterns, and
helps them to react to the advantages of a specific task. For
example, for the content aggregation task, a bridge manager
often needs to check multiple sources of information (e.g.
structural, financial, and historical) prior to their response
for a new bridge maintenance request. During this process,
actionable knowledge regarding where to look for informa-
tion, and how to examine the information, plays a significant
role in addressing this task.
Tools, in this context, are considered as means to trans-
form the knowledge into desired task actions. Knowledge
workers primarily use tools such as email/documents/local
folders, to produce and communicate task related contents
and information. In the process, their domain knowledge (i.e.
the expertise) is employed, and further results in context-
dependent actions that are used in their analytical process.
These professionals currently posses and use a number of
different tools; however, we found that both groups were
severely lacking tools that were actually designed to support
to their analysis workflows. This finding pointed to the need
for a tool that encapsulates the users’ actionable knowledge
and helps them effectively perform necessary actions.
Based on the feedback from our interviews, we summa-
rized a set of selected actionable knowledge that describes
the six common organizational task activities. As shown in
Figure 1, every task in an analytical process is decomposed
into a set of fine-grained actionable knowledge. Note that,
this list contains only a subset of all the collected action-
able knowledge; some of the stated actionable knowledge
is unclear, ambiguous, or contradictory, and is therefore ex-
cluded from this list. Also as seen in Figure 1, we have con-
structed a clear mapping between high-level tasks and their
fine-grained tangible artifacts. This mapping provides clear
insights into the organizational workflow. More importantly,
it is further transformed into a range of important design re-
quirements for creating an effective knowledge-assisted vi-
sual analytics system.
3.3. Transforming Actionable Knowledge into VA
Design Guidelines though Prototyping
Our next step was transforming this list of specified action-
able knowledge and requirements into proper visual analyt-
ics designs. We followed the design theory for enterprise-
knowledge-processes [MMG02], and conducted several it-
erations of prototyping in close collaboration with our users
to encapsulate their actionable knowledge into functions. Al-
though both groups shared similar common analytical tasks,
our prototyping methods with them were quite different
(considering their diverse workspaces and time constrains).
Specifically, we used a more frequent, throwaway prototyp-
ing [And94] method for our collaboration with Xerox. Given
the shorter design cycle (three months), the throwaway pro-
totyping guaranteed us more design iterations and, more im-
portantly, allowed us to explore broader options for trans-
forming the actionable knowledge into visual analytics de-
signs. A sample of the intermediate prototypes can be seen
in our companion media.
Based on our iterative prototyping with business analysts,
we found a clear preference for a unified, intuitive, and less
intrusive system that can help effectively retrieve and man-
age desired information. Therefore, we finalized our pro-
totype and implemented Taste [WJB10]; an interactive vi-
sual analytics system that enhances employees’ capabilities
to search and share business information. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, Taste is structured to embed information retrieval cues
into a coordinated multi-level visualization system. At a high
level, Taste encodes these cues with a set of three visual-
izations, a Facet view (A), a Temporal view(B), and a En-
tity Tag view (C). Each view presents a particular aspect
of document activity information across entire collections.
In lower-level views, Taste presents visualizations that inte-
grate related activity information for single documents(D).
Using this multi-level structure, Taste helps users to cohe-
sively depict document activity from different points of view,
and effectively find the desired information.
Thanks to a long-term collaboration plan, we were able to
conduct a longer-cycle, more functionality-based prototyp-
ing process with the bridge managers at both USDOT and
NCDOT. This iterative functional prototyping [GB94] sim-
ulates application behavior and helps to ensure that more of
our design system is understood at each step of the collab-
oration. In each iteration, we invited the bridge managers to
test and evaluate our prototypes by working with the sys-
tem to perform actual bridge analysis. Based on their sug-
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 6
Figure 3: An overview for both the Taste and IRSV systems. (Middle) The design guidelines actually incorporated within each
system are indicated by marked checkboxes. (Right) Taste consists of (A) Facet view, (B) Temporal view, (C) Entity Tag view,
(D) Detail view, and (E) Storytelling view. (Left) IRSV contains multiple analysis views, including (F) Detailed structural view,
(G) High-level structural view, (I) Geospatial view, and (H) Temporal analysis view. In addition, IRSV provides two variations:
(K) a knowledge base integrated system and (J) a web-based system.
gestions and requests, we then refined, re-designed, and re-
implemented the prototype system to increase its effective-
ness to support the bridge analysis process.
During a nine-month period, we generated over ten func-
tional prototypes, including various changes to the visualiza-
tion and interface designs. Over the course of past two years,
our prototyping has resulted in a final set of variations of the
system. These all focus on providing support for bridge man-
agement using integrated remote sensing and visualization,
so we generally refer them as IRSV. While each of the sys-
tems is designed to accommodate requirements for different
use cases, all follow a similar set of underlining actionable
knowledge, and were designed to achieve the same goal: to
provide examination of heterogeneous data sources and fa-
cilitate effective bridge maintenance planning.
At the heart of IRSV, we designed a set of visualiza-
tions to help bridge managers organize and analyze their
assets from the multiple perspectives essential to their de-
cisionmaking process. As seen in Figure 3, these visualiza-
tions were designed to perform the three high-level analyses:
structural analysis (G), temporal analysis (H), and geospa-
tial analysis (I). For lower-level tasks, we designed a struc-
tural detail view (F) to automatically link information be-
tween each bridge component, and provided bridge man-
agers with an intuitive visualization to interactively analyze
specific corresponding information. All of these visualiza-
tions are tightly coordinated together in such a way that
an action performed in one view affects all other views.
Implementation details can be seen in our companion pa-
pers [WDC?10] [WJD?09] [WCHR10].
4. Examples for System Design and Evaluation
Both Taste and IRSV were designed following our guide-
lines. These knowledge-assisted visual analytics systems are
implemented to support the analytic processes encountered
in organizational environments. Through iterative prototyp-
ing processes, each was tailored to the analytical workflow
of its target domain. As shown in Figure 3 (Middle), the de-
sign guidelines actually incorporated within each system are
illustrated separately by marked checkboxes. We also con-
ducted user-studies to evaluate the utility of these systems.
Instead of emphasizing technique details, our discussion
below focuses on evaluations for the effectiveness of our
systems to support domain analysis processes. Specifically,
we summarize the users’ feedback and comments, and use
these to assess the performance of our systems in facilitating
the common task activities. We have also planned future im-
provements for the systems based on the users’ suggestions.
4.1. Taste: Supporting Business Information Analysis
To evaluate Taste, 21 Xerox employees participated in both
lab and field studies using the tool. In the following subsec-
tions, we describe how Taste was found to be useful and ef-
fective in facilitating each of the six common task activities
in the domain analysis process. Detailed statistical results for
this evaluation can be found in our previous report [WJB10].
4.1.1. Gathering content into a unified visual interface
At the heart of Taste is a transparent, real-time, contextual
data capturer, which was designed to capture the user’s activ-
ities around office documents, calendars, emails, etc. Taste
creates an index of documents on a user’s machine, and logs
information about the user’s activities with these documents.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 7
Taste stores this information, along with copies of the doc-
uments, in a unified repository. All captured information is
then indexed and grouped with its related documents, and is
interactively presented to the user through Taste’s visualiza-
tion interface, as shown in Figure 3 (Right).
All participants indicated the usefulness of this unified in-
terface. They agreed that integrating multiple information
streams into a single interface sufficiently encapsulates their
actionable knowledge, reducing search times for related in-
formation. They believe this could greatly assist them in
gathering and aggregating contents from multi-channels
4.1.2. Enable facet search for content filtering
As shown in Figure 3 (A), Taste utilizes the Facet view to
aggregate both the documents and the people with whom a
user has previously interacted. This visualization allows the
users to filter and sort information based on automatically
extracted data facets, including type (person or document)
and format (email, text document, etc.). Facet view further
sorts and displays document activity by importance, which
is measured by frequency and users’ dwell time.
When presented to the participants, they spontaneously
formulated a variety of facet filters to find information. They
were generally satisfied with the efficiency of using Taste to
’slice and dice’ information, and appreciated the flexibility
to perform customized analysis.
A common suggestion was to be able to also create for-
mulas to sort the documents with customized measures. One
analyst indicated that introducing customized time factors
(such as increasing the importance of a more recently cre-
ated documents over older documents) would be especially
useful for filtering.
4.1.3. Interactive Information Analysis
Besides the facet view, Taste also supports high-level con-
tent analysis based on both temporal information and content
keywords (See Figure 3 (B) and (C)). Taste utilizes the tem-
poral view to show how a user’s activities unfold over time,
and presents the temporal trends and patterns of a user’s doc-
ument activities. This view allows the user to interactively
drill down to a specific time, and helps the users examine
the content, which occurred in that time span. In addition, an
entity tag view is used to enable fast entity browsing. This is
implemented using an automated entity extractor, which ex-
tracts entities, such as company name, contacts, etc., from
all of previous documents. As shown in Figure 3 (C), Taste
enables users to focus on a specific entity, and examine any
information related to it.
In the low-level view, Taste incorporates a detail view
(Figure 3 (D)) for depicting a single document from mul-
tiple perspectives, such as its related temporal information
and other versions of the document. All views in Taste are
coordinated, such that updates in one view are immediately
reflected in the others.
In our studies, Tastes was compared with other existing
tools to assess its analysis capabilities. The participants were
generally positive about Taste’s effectiveness for retrieving
and analyzing business information. All participants agreed
that the ability of viewing information from different granu-
larities can largely help them filer and analyze information.
One suggestion was to provide finer-grained categories,
and display more information for entities. One participant
suggested that the current categorization is too broad by ref-
erencing a common expectation: Instead of general, high-
level categories like browsing, email, etc, usually the cate-
gories of interest are more narrow like “email with Bob” or
“browsing about JAVA”)
4.1.4. Using Storytelling to generate and share reports
By utilizing an interactive storytelling view, shown in Fig-
ure 3 (D), Taste allows users to interactively collect evi-
dence, annotate it, and share it with others. The storytelling
view allows the user to take a more active role in informa-
tion tracking, and enables them to express the information
relationship based on their own knowledge. Whenever a user
comes across an interesting information object in Taste, they
can directly add that object to a new or existing story view.
Once an element is in a storytelling view, the user can fur-
ther annotate or tag it, and can group different story elements
based on their reasoning logic.
The story created by one user around a collection of peo-
ple and documents may be of interest to other users as well,
so Taste allows stories created in one instance of the system
to be shared with users in another instance. Analysts who
receive these shared stories, are able to modify them based
on their understanding of the topics, and add or suggest re-
moval of story elements. By sharing their stories about doc-
ument activities, groups of employees can now understand
those activities better, and improve information analysis for
all members of the group.
While the story feature is new, many participants found
the idea of collaboratively searching for information intu-
itive, and felt that the feature was practical and useful. Al-
though we didn’t set up a collaborative environment for par-
ticipants (due to privacy concerns), participants were still in-
terested in utilizing the story view and tried to share findings
between different instances of Taste.
In summary, while Taste has so far only been evalu-
ated by a limited number of participants (albeit actual tar-
get users), it appears to be a promising technology and a
successful design. Based on the feedback we have received,
we believe the design of this visualization successfully en-
capsulates the actionable knowledge and supports the ana-
lytical workflows that are essential for business information
analysis. Through our on-going collaboration, we are fur-
ther refining its basic functions and enriching it with more
advanced features.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 8
4.2. IRSV: Facilitating Bridge Maintenance Planning
Our evaluations of IRSV and its variations were performed
iteratively throughout the collaboration, and were mainly
conducted with a group of bridge managers from both North
Carolina DOT and Charlotte DOT (CDOT). These 12 (10
male, 2 female) bridge managers participated in at least three
sessions of onsite evaluations
In the following subsections, we summarize feedback
from these evaluations and assess the systems (multiple
IRSV variations collectively) for their effectiveness in facil-
itating each task activity encountered in bridge maintenance
planning.
4.2.1. Integrating heterogeneous data into one interface
As shown in Figure 3, IRSV provides bridge managers with
a unified content interface that combines multiple streams
of bridge information. It can incorporate a range of data
sources, including National Bridge Inspection Standards
(NBIS) datasets, high-resolution aerial images, and Light
Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) scans. In addition, IRSV
provides an advanced feature, incorporating knowledge con-
tents from an ontological knowledge structure. As detailed
in our previous report [WJD?09], using a service-oriented-
architecture, IRSV has been extended to communicate with
the knowledge base, access and fetch the inference results,
and present them in a cohesive visual interface.
Through comparisons to existing bridge management sys-
tems, it was clear that IRSV was appreciated for its effi-
ciency in contents aggregation. All participants considered
the visual interface well addressed their information retrieval
needs, representing cohesive and useful for bridge informa-
tion. Moreover, they were excited about the ability to access
and follow prior practices and guidelines that were embod-
ied in the knowledge base.
4.2.2. Customizing analysis workflows
Because it was built with a modular architecture, IRSV al-
lows bridge managers to extend the system to incorporate ad-
vanced visualizations and more effective data models. Each
visualization component integrated within IRSV was de-
signed to be interchangeable with other equivalent visualiza-
tions. Furthermore, IRSV provides bridge managers with the
flexibility to combine and sequence different visualizations
to fit their individual analysis routines.
All participants appreciated the flexibility of the inter-
face, finding it useful for customizing the system to only
utilize the necessary visualizations in their particular prac-
tices. They spontaneously formed a variety of visualization
combinations in order to find bridge assets. The most com-
mon strategy used was to combine a geospatial window with
scatter plot view to gain information for the most recent
changes of a particular bridge. A manager from NCDOT fur-
ther pointed out that,“[IRSV] will greatly shorten the catch-
up time between my learning to use the system and my actual
use of it.”
4.2.3. Analyzing information from multiple aspects
All participants noted that IRSV provided a visual ex-
ploration environment to help them analyze information
from multiple aspects. The capability to perform not only
geo-temporal analysis, but also structural analysis was of
great value to their decision-making process (See Figure 3
(G)(I)(H)). One of the managers commented that, “[the]
linked visualizations provide me with a cohesive understand-
ing about the data that I am working on. It reduces the time
I spent on manually searching for information, and helps me
focus more on the task itself.”
In particular, seven out of the 12 bridges managers pointed
out that the temporal analysis in IRSV provided them with
the capability to effectively monitor changes in bridge condi-
tions and identify maintenance candidates. In addition, after
familiarizing themselves with the concepts and usage of the
visualizations, most bridge managers (9 out of 12) noted that
the capability to examine bridge structures simultaneously
from multiple levels (overview and detailed view) allowed
for effective transitions from examining large amounts of
data to inspecting bridges one at a time.
4.2.4. Evidence collection and report generation
As shown in Figure 3(J), IRSV also supports interactively
collecting, annotating, and sharing analysis findings be-
tween different collaborators. Using a web interface, IRSV
treats individual visualizations and group workspaces as col-
lectable items. It enables bridge managers to directly drag
and drop these items into a sandbox, designed to collect all
the findings and sort them temporally. IRSV further allows
bridge managers to use the collected evidence to support
their analysis hypotheses and create analysis reports. The
bridge managers can directly combine findings that can sup-
port their reasoning and share them with colleagues, through
built-in sharing channels or emails.
Most participants found the idea of collaboratively man-
aging bridge information intriguing. They consider our ap-
proach practical and useful for creating preliminary analysis
reports. There was significant interest in utilizing the fea-
tures that allowed evidence to be reported and shared with
others. While we are still refining these features, we have
seen great potential for IRSV to support the inherently col-
laborative nature of bridge maintenance planning.
In summary, IRSV was designed by following our design
guidelines set forth earlier in this paper. It has been deployed
to USDOT for daily use and testing. Based on feedback from
bridge mangers, IRSV appears to be a successful design and
a useful visual analytics system that effectively supports the
bridge maintenance management process. The effort to en-
rich IRSV is still on-going; we are working closely with
bridge mangers to identify new actionable knowledge that
requires advanced features, including web-based collabora-
tion and post-analysis.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 9
5. Limitations
We undertook this research to better understand the prag-
matic analytical processes in an organizational environment,
and identify practical design guidelines for visual analytics
systems. To this end, we consolidated our design guidelines
into characteristics for the six common analytical task ac-
tivities, their related actionable knowledge, and interactions
between the two. We found that actionable knowledge plays
a unique role in addressing important problems in organiza-
tions, and affects knowledge workers’ performance. There-
fore, we transformed this knowledge into design guidelines
for visual analytics systems. We hope that our guidelines will
help others provide better support for domain analytical pro-
cesses within their visual analytical applications.
There are limitations to our research which must should
be addressed. Generalizability of our design guidelines is
limited because this research was conducted within only two
organizations. We attempted to mitigate local biases by in-
creasing the number of participants. Nevertheless, different
training backgrounds, personal preferences, and project time
constraints could engender different analytical conditions.
Moreover, our research characterizes the domain analyti-
cal workflow through interviews and surveys, which gener-
ally are self-reported by participants. Our research was also
limited, in that it modeled the analytical workflow from a
retrospective perspective, whereas Brows et al. demonstrated
that problem spaces and solutions are established and change
dynamically in interactions with people and the environ-
ment [BD91]. Therefore, our understanding of domain anal-
ysis and actionable knowledge is constrained to the knowl-
edge workers’ general way of performing tasks.
Finally, our research is limited by its evaluations with do-
main experts. We evaluated Taste with formal studies and
IRSV with informal case studies. Developing evaluations,
strategies, and methodologies to accurately assess the effec-
tiveness of a knowledge-assisted visual analytics system is
challenging. At this point we do not have a clear outline
on the best evaluation approach; the design of guidelines
for evaluating a knowledge-assisted visual analytic system
would be one interesting future direction for our research.
However, while we recognize these limitations in our
work, we believe supporting organizational analysis pro-
cesses is important visual analytics research. Our design
guidelines (Figure 4) illuminate the role that a knowledge-
assisted VA plays in such complex problem-solving environ-
ments.
6. Conclusions
This paper has presented two years of iterative design efforts
to explore and advance the design of knowledge-assisted
visual analytics systems. Based on our extensive interac-
tions with domain knowledge workers, we identified and
consolidated six common task activities that are generally
used to perform organizational analysis. To decompose these
high-level tasks to implementable artifacts, we further re-
framed the problem and disseminated these tasks into action-
able knowledge that illustrates the fine-grained functional re-
quirements for each task. Using these requirements, we de-
signed and implemented two knowledge-assisted visual an-
alytics systems for our collaborators.
Our primary contribution is the resulting set of design
guidelines that, when implemented, allow visual analytics
researchers to effectively collaborate with domain users, and
to empower knowledge workers in organizational environ-
ments to effectively accelerate their analytical processes.
These guidelines provide design considerations for both
high-level task activities and low-level functional require-
ments. In addition, we have summarized a set of evaluations
that show the effectiveness of visual analytics systems de-
signed using our guidelines as a basis.
We hope that by proposing these general guidelines, we
can begin a serious discussion of design considerations crit-
ical for producing effective knowledge-assisted visual ana-
lytics systems. We will continue to evaluate and refine our
guidelines with current and future collaborators. In addition,
we hope that these guidelines will lead to potential impacts
in today’s organizational environments.
Xiaoyu Wang, et al. / Designing Knowledge-Assisted VA Systems for Organizational Environments 10
Figure 4: Our design guidelines in checklist form.
References
[AG] AG S.: Business management software. 1
[And94] ANDRIOLE S.: Fast, cheap requirements prototype, or
else! Software, IEEE 11, 2 (Mar. 1994), 85 –87. 5
[AS92] ARGYRIS C., SCHON D. A.: Theory in Practice: In-
creasing Professional Effectiveness. Jossey-Bass, 1992. 4, 5
[BD91] BROWN J. S., DUGUID P.: Organizational Learning and
Communities-of-Practice: Toward a Unified View of Working,
Learning, and Innovation. Organization Science 2, 1 (1991), 40–
57. 9
[BGS09] BUCHER T., GERICKE A., SIGG S.: Process-centric
business intelligence. Business Process Management Journal 15,
408-429 (2009). 1, 5
[CKH?10] CONVERTINO G., KAIRAM S., HONG L., SUH B.,
CHI E. H.: Designing a cross-channel information management
tool for workers in enterprise task forces. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (New
York, NY, USA, 2010), AVI ’10, ACM, pp. 103–110. 2
[CS04] CROSS R., SPROULL L.: More than an answer: Informa-
tion relationships for actionable knowledge. Organization Sci-
ence 15 (August 2004), 446–462. 5
[GB94] GRAY D. E., BLACK T. R.: Prototyping of computer-
based training materials. Computers and Education 22, 3 (1994),
251 – 256. 5
[GIAH09] GECZY P., IZUMI N., AKAHO S., HASIDA K.: An-
alytics and management of collaborative intranets. In Collabo-
rative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 623–631. 4
[GRMT04] GILE K. G. K., RUSSOM P., MOORE C., TEUBNER
C.: The Emergence Of Process-Centric BI. Forrest Research,
Cambridge, MA, 2004. 1
[Heu07] HEUER R.: Psychology of Intelligence Analysis. Pherson
Associates, 2007. 4
[IBM] IBM: Business analytics and optimization. 1
[IH95] I N., H T.: The Knowledge Creating Company. Oxford
University Press, 1995. 4
[MMG02] MARKUS M. L., MAJCHRZAK A., GASSER L.: A
design theory for systems that support emergent knowledge pro-
cesses. MIS Quarterly 26, 3 (2002), pp. 179–212. 4, 5
[NE00] NISSEN M. E., ESPINO J.: Knowledge process and sys-
tem design for the coast guard. Knowledge and Process Manage-
ment 7 (2000), 165–176. 2
[PC05] PIROLLI P., CARD S.: The sensemaking process and
leverage points for analyst technology as identified through cog-
nitive task analysis. Proc. Int’l Conf. Intelligence Analysis
(2005). 3
[WCHR10] WANG X., CHEN S.-E., HAUSER E., RIBARSKY
W.: imonitor: Architecture of web-based collaborative visual
analytics system for bridge management. In Transportation Re-
search Board 90 Annual Meeting (2010). 6
[WDC?10] WANG X., DOU W., CHEN S.-E., RIBARSKY W.,
CHANG R.: An interactive visual analytics system for bridge
management. Computer Graphics Forum 29 (2010), 1033–1042.
1, 2, 6
[WJB10] WANG X., JANSSEN B., BIER E.: Finding business
information by visualizing enterprise document activity. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Advanced Visual In-
terfaces (New York, NY, USA, 2010), AVI ’10, ACM, pp. 41–48.
1, 5, 6
[WJD?09] WANG X., JEONG D. H., DOU W., LEE S.-W., RIB-
ARSKY W., CHANG R.: Defining and applying knowledge con-
version processes to a visual analytics system. Computers and
Graphics 33, 5 (2009), 616 – 623. 6, 8
[ZFE07] ZIMMERMAN J., FORLIZZI J., EVENSON S.: Research
through design as a method for interaction design research in hci.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems (New York, NY, USA, 2007), CHI ’07, ACM,
pp. 493–502. 1

