1. Event Structuring as a General Approach to 
Building Knowledge in Time-Based Collections 
 
William Ribarsky 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
Zachary Wartell 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
Wenwen Dou 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
Keywords 
Time-based data collections, event structure, temporal structure, narrative, 
storytelling, GIS. 
Abstract  
Many kinds of data collections are time-based or can be collected in a 
temporal manner. There has been a desire in the geography and geospatial 
communities to put temporal behavior on the same footing as spatial struc-
ture and to develop a comprehensive geo-temporal information system. In 
many cases, temporal information refers to sequences of happenings in the 
world. To efficiently represent such temporal information, we present 
event structuring as a general approach to build knowledge in time-based 
collections. In this case an event is defined as a meaningful occurrence that 
has substantial impact on subsequent developments. A properly organized 
event sequence forms a narrative, or story. Such stories are powerful me-
chanisms for human understanding; not only are they in a form that make 
them easier to recall, but they lead to mental models that can be intuited, 
examined, and joined together into larger models. In this paper, the pro-
2  
posed event structuring methods are not limited to geospatial data, but ra-
ther any types of time-based collections such as text corpora. We first pro-
vide the definition of event structuring, and then describe detailed exam-
ples of event structures built upon different kinds of data. Last, we raise 
the need for an event descriptive language in order to generate, organize, 
and compare event structures. 
1.1. Introduction 
There are many kinds of data collections that are time-based. These in-
clude many types of physical data, either from simulations or observations, 
text collections with temporal information embedded, and multimedia col-
lections with time stamps, embedded temporal information, or references 
to events in times. In many cases, this temporal information refers to hap-
penings in the world, either real, simulated, or imagined. An example of 
physical data is the results from simulating a hurricane, where a storm 
surge forms that, depending on the direction and wind fields of the hurri-
cane, is followed by inundation of barrier islands and coastal areas, after 
which there is flooding, rain squalls, and damaging winds. This sequence 
of events forms a narrative, or story, of the hurricane. An example of a text 
collection is a set of histories and/or reports. Embedded in the texts are 
dates, names, places, and occurrences that can be organized as events in 
time. For a particular geographical region, there could be social, political, 
military, weather, and other events that when brought together in an over-
all organization would reveal relationships among the events and thus 
among the histories. An example of a multimedia collection is online news 
pages aggregated over time. When properly organized along the time di-
mension, the stories extracted from these pages can be aggregated into top-
ic clusters, which typically show a burst of related stories after a motivat-
ing event (e.g., the tsunami in Japan) (Luo 2010). For a large event there is 
an ebb and flow of related stories and many sub-topic clusters. 
 
Central to all these types of data is the idea of an event, which we define 
here as a meaningful occurrence in time. In this paper, we demonstrate that 
an event is a powerful organizing concept, giving meaning and structure to 
temporal information. When properly organized, a sequence of events with 
coupled topics could indicate a cause and effect relationship and a se-
quence with similar topics would indicate a trend. A hierarchical event 
structure could emerge with larger events encompassing distributions of 
smaller events. Additional meanings would emerge from the event se-
quencing and structuring itself. A properly organized sequence would tell a 
3 
story, as in the hurricane example above. These stories are powerful me-
chanisms for human understanding; not only are they in a form that make 
them easier to recall, but they lead to mental models that can be intuited, 
examined, and joined together into larger models. 
 
To the extent that a data collection refers to happenings in the world, there 
is also usually a geographical reference. A GIS can be used to organize 
and make queries of the geographical references, but there is then the ques-
tion of how to include the time structure. Time is a dimension, like the 
three spatial dimensions, and this fact can be used to provide a similar or-
ganization as in the 3D GIS. But time is also different, as will be discussed 
further below. Events, here with the expanded definition of meaningful oc-
currences in time and space, provide the additional organization that will 
lead to a full 4D GIS. 
1.2.Defining Events, Creating Event Structures, Organizing the 
Time Dimension 
To organize the time dimension in a way similar to the spatial dimensions, 
we employ the events defined above. Since the unstructured time dimen-
sion is unbounded, the events provide a scale. Time units can be centuries, 
decades, years, months, days, hours, seconds, and nanoseconds. Seasonal 
weather events have a scale of hours to days whereas climate events have a 
scale of decades to centuries. The scale is determined by the event catego-
ry. 
 
The idea of a motivating event provides further structuring. The motivating 
event for the Japanese tsunami and nuclear meltdown was the tsunami it-
self. The motivating event for the Israeli incursion into Lebanon in 2006 
was the firing of rockets at Israeli border towns by Hezbollah. All sorts of 
sub-events, reactions, and responses flowed from this motivating event. In 
cases such as the latter case, there may be some dispute about the motivat-
ing event and when it occurred. However, topic-temporal analysis and/or 
spatial temporal analysis will find the strongest clusters of events and their 
associated motivating event(s). We have shown this to be the case for 
broadcast news story analysis (Luo 2010, Luo 2006). Since, for example, 
visual analysis tools that use this structure are exploratory, one does not 
expect to be given the single right description of a story but rather the main 
thread and associated relevant information from which one can make his 
own interpretation. There are other examples demonstrating that these 
4  
event structures can generally be generated automatically or semi-
automatically. For example, we have shown that storm surge, hurricane 
windfield, and atmospheric events associated with air quality can be gen-
erated by identifying and tracking 2D and 3D features of interest in simu-
lations or observational data (Yu 2010). Events associated with the devel-
opment of new research themes and ideas can be identified in large 
collections of proposals or research papers using a combination of tempor-
al and topic modeling (Dou 2011), though in this case information from 
outside the collections must be used to describe the events in detail (e.g., 
information about when a new NSF program was launched that led to the 
development of the new ideas). 
 
The motivating events provide a hierarchical structure. A main motivating 
event can encompass subordinate motivating events. (In the case of the 
tsunami, these subordinate events would be the breakdown of cooling sys-
tems that led to successive core meltdowns, evacuations, emergency main-
tenance, and so on.) In addition, we use the fact that all these time struc-
tures have a beginning and an end. To this we apply a “narrative 
imperative”, where we assume a story is told between the beginning and 
the end. As much as possible, we apply a shaping based on the event clus-
tering (including spatial-temporal and topical modeling) and make an in-
terpretation that brings out the story, since this will provide the most mea-
ningful structure in time. We have found that this hierarchical structuring 
and narrative shape emerge in a variety of different types of temporal data; 
we posit that this is a general phenomenon. However, the best, most mea-
ningful structuring cannot be done entirely automatically, though our expe-
rience is that much of it can be. Here the user’s knowledge and reasoning 
can be inserted. One goal of a visual analytics interface would be to guide 
the user to do this at just the right point in the time structure. Because of 
the hierarchical structure, this can be done quickly at higher levels. 
1.3. Events in Space: 4D GIS 
Since Einstein, it has been realized that time stands on an equal footing 
with the spatial dimensions in the physical world. Although this equiva-
lence is apparent at, say, the scale of the universe, time takes on a different 
character than the other dimensions at our earth-centered scale. Most sig-
nificantly, time is unbounded at this scale whereas the other 3 dimensions 
are bounded. (The spatial dimensions are also unbounded at the scale of 
the expanding universe, but this is not the relevant scale for an earth-
centered focus.) Thus, the spatial dimensions latitude, longitude, and alti-
5 
tude are bound to the surface of the earth (and thin shells above and below 
the surface) since that is where almost all earth-focused detail lies. (The 
thin shell above the earth’s surface extends, say, through the stratosphere, 
and that below the earth’s surface to the deepest mines.) But unlike the 
spatial dimensions, time keeps unspooling, starting with the primordial 
earth and unfolding inexorably as the present becomes the past. One thing 
is for sure; each passing instant adds to the time dimension. 
 
This temporal behavior has the effect of endless “stacking up” of occur-
rences over spatial regions. In fact, the GeoTime papers take advantage of 
this metaphor to provide a rich visualization of events over geography. 
1.4. Events in a Narrative Structure 
According to a report published by the International Data Corporation, in-
formation that was either created or replicated in digital form in 2007 
alone was 281 exabytes, and the projected compound annual growth rate 
between 2008 and 2011 was almost 60%. Without a doubt, such informa-
tion contains valuable knowledge regarding every aspect of our lives, such 
as history, social behavior, new scientific inventions, etc. However, given 
the overwhelming amount of information, it is nearly impossible to ma-
nually sanitize, extract meaningful events, organize, and analyze these dig-
ital collections. Although organizing such information based on content or 
meaning is important, creating event structures along time allows us to 
discover the historic evolution of the events, themes, and even ideas. One 
can construct narratives and stories that effectively summarize and make 
coherent large amount of information. Lawrence Stone (1979) defines 
narrative as: “the organization of material in a chronologically sequential 
order and the focusing of the content into a single coherent story, albeit 
with subplots. Narratives are analytic constructs that unify a number of 
past of contemporaneous actions and happenings, which might otherwise 
have been viewed as discrete or disparate, into a coherent relational whole 
that gives meaning to and explains each of its elements and is, at the same 
time, constituted by them (McCullagh 1978). Narrative permits a form of 
sequential causation that allows for twisting, varied, and heterogeneous 
time paths to a particular outcome” (Griffin 1993). Our process of event 
structuring is similar to narrative in that it’s not just temporally aligned in-
cidents; it is centered on events that signal the beginning of multiple the-
matically related incidents. And the structure of the events makes the con-
nections and relationships between incidents easily inferable. Organizing 
unstructured information into an event structure allows one to grasp the 
6  
gist of massive amount of information. For example, an event structure 
constructed based on everyday news could clearly represent what is/was 
happening and how each event progresses throughout time. An event struc-
ture built upon social media such as tweets could provide an up-to-the-
minute of what everyone is talking about around us and across the globe. 
However, with 140 million new tweets per day, constructing an efficient 
analysis has become a highly challenging problem.  
1.1.1. Human-Computer Generated Linear Narrative 
Ideally, the event-based narrative structures should be general enough so 
that their general aspects can be widely applied to different kinds of data 
sources, be it GIS or non-geospatial data. In addition, the narrative should 
be human-computer generated, since without automation it will not be 
scalable and without human input it will not be fully meaningful. 
 
For a human-computer generated narrative, we have the following goals. 
 
1. Create an interactive analysis program, ING (“InteractiveNarra-
tiveGenerator”) such that a human user, P (“Person”), using pro-
gram ING can interactively compute a digital narrative, N, from an 
arbitrary dataset D. 
 
2. Create a program, NC, (“NarrativeComparator”), that can auto-
nomously compare and cluster large sets of these digital narratives 
generated via interactive computation using the ING tool. 
 
Below we give our operational definition of narrative and show how our 
goals above have a perhaps not entirely superficial similarity to several 
fundamental theorems in computer science. 
 
A digital narrative is a narrative encoded in digital media (whether it is en-
coded as data or a program is an independent issue). A human generated 
digital narrative is a narrative generated by a person, but without using a 
software tool that explicitly aims to semi-automate the creation of the final 
narrative structure. (So a narrative created by a person using a word pro-
cessor, or electronic search and analysis tool such as Matlab, is still called 
a human generated narrative). In contrast, a human-computer generated 
narrative is a digital narrative generated by a software tool that explicitly 
extracts events in and/or helps the user interactively structure the digital 
narrative. Referring to our above, we desire to make an InteractiveNarrati-
7 
veGenerator program that helps people generate human-computed generat-
ed narratives for arbitrary digital datasets. 
 
At present, we limit ourselves to human-computer generated linear narra-
tives rather than branching or recursive narratives. We briefly discuss 
some intuitive reasons here. Following Occam’s Razor, one should gener-
ate the simplest narrative which explains the temporal dataset unless one 
can trade simplicity for greater explanatory power. We further take the fol-
lowing stance. When comparing two otherwise similar narratives of rough-
ly the same length, a person will generally find linear narratives easier to 
understand than branching narratives or recursive narratives. This is con-
sistent with the observation that introductory computer science students are 
typically introduced to imperative programming constructs starting with 
sequential statements, then branching, then loops and finally recursion. A 
major caveat is that narrative length is important as well. One can imagine 
two narratives (which happen to be proper algorithms) that have equivalent 
interpretations, but where the first one is linear and 100 sentences long and 
the second one is iterative using a loop construct and only 3 sentences 
long. The former would be easier to understand for a person with impera-
tive programming knowledge. However, we contend that generating a 
short linear narrative whose sentences use a high-level of abstraction is 
more desirable than generating a more precise (i.e. using less abstraction) 
branching or recursive narrative. 
1.5. Events in Non-Geographic Information Spaces 
There is much time-dependent information that is not spatial or not strong-
ly spatial (e.g., text or multimedia collections). The event structuring de-
scribed above can be pulled out from the spatial dimensions and used 
alone for these types of data. It appears that the ideas developed for geo-
graphic time will apply as well to these time-dependent information spac-
es.  
 
Take document collections as an example: similar to the 4D GIS, docu-
ment collections contain bounded dimensions plus the unbounded time 
dimension. The words, for example, are bounded by a finite vocabulary 
(though it may slowly grow over time), and the organization of the words 
is bounded by a set of explicit rules – grammar. Eventually copying all 
documents, from the beginning of writing on paper, to digital space from a 
paper-centric should bring tremendous benefits. However, the growth of 
digital information is exponential, as described above.  
8  
 
Visual Representation and Analysis of Temporal Structures. Certain types 
of visualizations, such as ThemeRiver (Havre, 2000), are particularly ap-
propriate for representing temporal information. ThemeRiver is initially 
designed to visualize thematic variations over time within a large collec-
tion of documents (Havre, 2000). ThemeRiver provides a macro-view of 
thematic changes in a corpus of documents over a serial dimension. It is 
designed to facilitate the identification of trends, patterns, and unexpected 
occurrence or non-occurrence of themes or topics. Figure 1 shows an in-
stance of ThemeRiver constructed based on microblogs. Although the x-
axis displays time in a linear manner, according to studies on perception 
(Kohler, 1947, attention is usually drawn to the sudden increase and de-
crease of “currents” within the river. Therefore, significant patterns such as 
“bursty themes” are easily discovered by users through exploring the 
ThemeRiver.  
 
Let’s take a look at a concrete example of how ThemeRiver can facilitate 
identifying the beginning of an epidemic spread. The data are provided by 
the VAST challenge 2011 committee. The goal of the VAST challenge is 
to push the forefront of visual analytics tools using benchmark data sets 
and establishing a forum to advance visual analytics evaluation methods 
(IEEE VAST Challenge, 2011. One of the tasks in the 2011 challenge is to 
characterize an epidemic spread in a metropolitan area. One of the datasets 
for this task is the microblog messages collected from users in that region. 
The question is when and where the outbreak started and whether it is con-
tained. With more than 1 million microblog messages in the data set, it is 
impossible to manually sift through all the messages, not to mention that 
lots of noise (random microblogs) exists in the data. An event structure 
constructed based on the microblogs can provide both a summary of all 
messages and insights regarding specific events such as the epidemic 
spread that the city officials worry about.  
 
In order to construct the temporal event structure, we first processed all 
microblogs and extracted 10 thematically meaningful topics using Latent 
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA). LDA is a generative model that represents the 
content of words and documents with probabilistic topics (Blei 2003). The 
LDA has several advantages comparing to the previous vector space mod-
els (VSM) widely used for text analysis, one of which is that each topic 
now is individually interpretable, providing a probability distribution over 
words that picks out a coherent cluster of correlated terms (Blei 2010). 
Among the 10 extracted topics, two of them (Figure 1) are highly relevant 
to illness, in particular flu-like symptoms. Having the topical summary of 
9 
all microblog messages, we further visualize the topical trend in Theme-
River to reveal temporal patterns and events. In Figure 2, each “current” 
represents a topic with the color schema connecting the topical trend and 
the actual content of the topic. The x-axis is time, with each interval denot-
ing 4 hours in a day. In this case, we are portraying the topical trends of 
the microblog data between April 29th and May 19th. 
 
 
Figure 1: Two salient topical trends in the ThemeRiver regarding the epi-
demic spread. 1a: microblogs about flu-like symptoms such as “cold, 
sweats, headache”. 1b: More severe symptoms such as “pneumonia, diarr-
hea” started appearing. 
 
Given the ThemeRiver view, one can easily discover that there are repeti-
tive patterns among several topics, such as users blogging about TV shows 
and commercials every night (topic 09 in red), and that lots of users like to 
talk about songs they love any time during the day (topic 05 in blue). 
However, what’s really attracts attention is during the last 3 days the repe-
titive patterns suddenly broke. Instead the majority of the microblogs are 
about flu-like symptoms such as “cold, headache, fatigue, sweats, etc.” 
(topic highlighted in Figure 1a) and “pneumonia, diarrhea, cough, etc.” 
(topic highlighted in Figure 1b. These two topics signify exactly when the 
outbreak has begun. In addition, one can also infer a progression of the ill-
ness from cold and headache to more serious symptoms such as pneumo-
nia, diarrhea and difficult breathing since all orange topic related micro-
blogs appear before the yellow topic related microblogs. 
10  
 
The above example has shown that a ThemeRiver representation of tem-
poral information can provide users with a quick summary of the micro-
blogs. But more importantly, it directs users’ attention to interesting pat-
terns such as the sudden increase of microblogs on an epidemic spread. 
With such clear patterns, users could identify exactly when the epidemic 
started and how it has progressed. Such representation can be considered 
as a crude instance of the event structure. What would make the structure 
more complete is to use other sources of information such as news to label 
the ThemeRiver with motivating events, so that users could infer causal re-
lationship between the news and people’s reaction reflected in their micro-
blogs. A powerful further advance would be to arrange the motivating 
events and important sub-events into a linear narrative, using the ideas de-
scribed above. The whole arc of the epidemic could then be described in a 
coherent fashion. These considerations apply to all event-based temporal 
analyses. 
 
Another data set provided by the 2011 VAST challenge committee is a text 
corpus containing new reports. If the ThemeRiver is properly labeled with 
relevant news information, the origin of the epidemic could be accurately 
discovered. We also applied the same topic modeling method to the news 
corpus and then filtered based on region and time to look for local news 
that might be related to the outbreak. Through our analysis, the most rele-
vant incident we have found took place on May 17th, 2011, a news report 
of a truck accident on the interstate 610 bridge in the evening. The bridge 
leads over the main river in the metropolitan area and, as a result of the ac-
cident, the truck’s cargo, probably containing some sort of chemicals, was 
spilled into the river. Tracing a few days back, on May 15th, a dangerous 
suspect who is member of the terrorist group “Paramurderers of Chaos” 
was arrested for trespassing near the loading docks at a food preparation 
plant in southwest part of the metropolitan area. Following this lead, we 
further discovered from the news data that the terrorist group had been 
planning a bioterrorism attack on the metropolitan area, which includes 
robbing equipment from a local university to manufacture dangerous mi-
crobes. As shown in Figure 2, with proper news events labeled on the mi-
croblogs data, one can infer causal relationship between an event and reac-
tions to the event and begin to make an overall narrative. 
  
11 
 
Figure 2: The microblog topical trends labeled with news information. On 
May 17th, right after a deadly collision involving a food truck that leaked 
chemicals into the major river in the city, people start showing flu-like 
symptoms. Following this lead, one can discover from the news that mem-
bers of a terrorist group were manufacturing dangerous microbes and poi-
soned a local food plant. Through combing the microblogs with the news 
information, not only one can discover “what happened” with respect to 
the epidemic spread, but also what caused it.  
 
Through combining different sources of information to augment each oth-
er, one can construct an effective event structure, which not only summa-
rizes “what happened” but also allows inference of causal relationship be-
tween an event and subsequent outcomes. Above we used news reports to 
label information gathered from social media (how people react to certain 
news reports). Such structure could allow one to immediately identify what 
have caused the reaction and infer why people have reacted in a certain 
way. Similar ideas could be applied to the field of scientific research. For 
example, when visualizing the topical trends of scientific publications, 
other sources of information such as grant awards could be used to label 
the trends. Therefore one can infer the impact of the grant award on the 
evolution of scientific fields. The temporal scale of such analysis might be 
significantly different from analyzing a news corpus, which is more instan-
taneous, causing immediate splash in social media. The lag between the 
time one scientific proposal has been awarded and the time that similar 
12  
topics are seen in the form of publications could be more than a full year. 
Therefore, when constructing event structures, proper time scale should be 
carefully chosen. But, as we have noted above, this scale can be found 
from analysis of event patterns for a given category of events. In the case 
of scientific themes, for example, application of topic modeling to propos-
al and scientific paper collections would, upon analysis, reveal the spacing 
between an idea introduced in a proposal and subsequent development of 
that idea in papers. 
1.6. Event Description Language for Linear Narrative 
In order to generate, organize, and compare precise narratives, we need an 
event descriptive language. In this section we outline an event description 
language for linear narratives. We use object-oriented design to describe 
the language and temporal database terminology (Zaniolo 1997). We are 
continuing to investigate the literature on temporal logic (Øhrstrøm 1995), 
trace theory (Mazurkiewicz 1995), structural equation modeling (Pearl 
2002), discrete-event modeling and simulation (Wainer 09) and narratolo-
gy (Jahn 2005).  There is significant overlap between these domains and 
our goals.  
 
We briefly review temporal database terminology. An instant is a single 
number, a 1-dimensional point in time. A period is a pair of instants. An 
interval is a single number, a 1-dimensional vector representing the dis-
placement between two instants. Valid time is the historical time period 
during which a database fact is true. Transaction time is the period of time 
when a fact was entered into the database. Temporal databases and TAMs 
may support valid-time only, transaction-time only, or both. The latter is 
called a bi-temporal database. Decades of real-world usage indicate that bi-
temporal databases should be provided because as temporal facts are ga-
thered, changes, corrections, and filling in of omissions are inevitable and 
end-users inevitably want the ability to rollback the database to see the his-
tory of these change operations.  
 
In our class hierarchy, an instant has a numeric value, a unit of measure, a 
calendar and a confidence descriptor. The latter three may be stored in an 
instant’s tuple or computed. The calendar is a 1D temporal coordinate sys-
tem. The confidence descriptor may indicate a confidence interval, a prob-
ability density function, or special value indicating either no error or that 
confidence information is not available. An instant’s numeric value may be 
+infinite. For example, a database fact with an associated period 
13 
(0,+infinite) is interpreted as holding true from instant 0 through the rest of 
time.  
 
 
Figure 3: Abbreviated class hierarchy for our event structure 
Event
PeriodEvent InstantEvent
-contains
0..*
-containedBy
0..1
-proximatelyMotivates
0..*
-proximatelyMotivatedBy
0..*
 
Next we define our event classes. A schematic of the class hierarchy is 
shown in Figure 3. An Event is an abstract class with 0 or 1 parent Peri-
odEvent objects (a forward declared class). PeriodEvent is an abstract class 
that has a valid time period and transaction time period. An InstantEvent is 
an abstract class that has a valid time instant and transaction time period. 
For example consider a sample from a digital thermometer such as (60°, 
12:00PM 8/19/2011). This indicates a temperature of 60° was recorded at 
the given instant. A PeriodEvent also has a list of child Event objects. This 
parent-child structure defines a navigatable 1-to-N binary relation called 
TemporalContainment. The TemporalContainment relation induces a for-
est of tree structures on Event objects. There is a second bi-directional, na-
vigatable N-to-N binary relation called the ProximatelyMotivates relation 
defined on the Event class. If Event A proximately motivates Event B, 
then A is an Event as a proximate cause of B. We restrict the proximate-
lyMotivates induced graph to be a directed-acyclic graph (DAG). Further, 
an Event A is said to “motivate” an event C if there is a path through the 
proximately motivates graph from A to C.  
 
Various constraints must be maintained between the proximately motivates 
and temporal containment relations to avoid semantic inconsistencies. For 
example, a PeriodEvent's valid time period must contain the valid time pe-
riods of all child PeriodEvent's and the instant of all child InstantEvent's.  
 
14  
The structure of the temporal DAG can be created from an analysis of the 
motivating events and relevant sub-events, which can be derived from a 
variety of temporal feature analysis methods, as described above. The du-
ration of events and their children (sub-events), appearance and disappear-
ance of objects, cause-effect relations, and other temporal features can be 
described in the rich narrative descriptor language. 
1.7. Towards a GTIS and TIS 
For some time, there has been a desire in the geography and geospatial 
communities to put temporal behavior on the same footing as spatial struc-
ture and to develop a comprehensive geo-temporal information system. 
This need has become more acute because of the explosion in the number 
of compact, relatively inexpensive devices that make possible widespread, 
repeated measurement in the environment over time. (Repeated collection 
of airborne LIDAR data over wide areas is just one example.) That geo-
temporal structuring is still an open problem is reflected in the recent re-
port outlining important challenges from the National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS 2010). 
 
Thinking in terms of a 4D GIS, as mentioned at the beginning of this pa-
per, is one way of approaching this problem. However, as indicated above, 
time is different than the spatial dimensions, and therefore it is more accu-
rate to speak about a geo-temporal information system (GTIS). Events can 
then be derived for each category of data in the system (e.g., geologic, cli-
mate, human history, weather, etc.) and the distribution of events over time 
provide the relevant scale and the periods for each category. Each of these 
event categories will have its own hierarchical structure and its own forest 
of trees, to which can be applied the human-computer narrative organiza-
tion described above. GIS concepts can then be brought into the GTIS 
structure. For example, the idea of layers can be introduced. Each category 
could be a GTIS layer, which could be turned on or off as desired. A 
weather event layer could be overlaid on a human activity layer. One 
would then see the correlation, spatial and temporal, of these categories. 
There might be interesting cause-effect relations revealed between events 
in different categories. To encode these would require some interconnec-
tions of the originally independent categorical forests of trees. It would al-
so be good to replicate in the temporal domain some of the GIS symbology 
and data organization. Of course, much of this grew out of hundreds of 
years of cartographic tradition. Road and political boundary vectors, for 
example, came from cartography and from the ongoing need to depict and 
15 
use this information efficiently. Not nearly as much work has been done 
for the temporal dimension nor is there a generally agreed upon set of 
symbols and data needs. The framework we have described here can be the 
basis for developing these things. For example, timelines annotated with 
key events are widely used to give an overview of history, military events, 
geologic events, key cultural moments, and so on. Having a structure with-
in the GTIS to efficiently produce these would be a powerful thing. 
 
To show the flexibility of such an approach, we recently described how the 
whole story of a city might be aggregated in a collection of hierarchical 
temporal event structures connected to a GIS structure (Ribarsky 2012). 
We chose Rome because of its 2500 year history as a major center of 
Western civilization. One can then consider architectural, military, politi-
cal, cultural, ethnographic, weather/climate, disease spread, and other his-
tories, each with its own event hierarchy embedded at certain levels in the 
overall GIS structure. For Rome there are massive amounts of documenta-
tion, including texts and images, for this collection of histories. Moreover, 
there is a substantial and growing digital archive. But all this detail has 
never been brought together into an integrated, whole story of Rome. It is 
clear that new causes, effects, and relationships would be discovered if this 
were done. We described in this paper how interactive timelines could be 
set up for these overlapping histories, so that major historical events could 
be unfolded into their sub-events and so that selection of any events on the 
timeline would reveal the details of the geographic extent (or how some-
thing like urban demographics, for example, developed over time). When 
considering two or more histories together, key points and patterns of cor-
relation become evident. The event and narrative structuring described in 
this paper provide a rich, meaningful, and effective organization for com-
prehensive histories like this. 
 
As discussed in previous sections of the paper, there are many information 
sources that are richly temporal without having a strong spatial component. 
Document collections which are augmented over time (such as proposal, 
research paper, and report collections) often fall into this category. For 
these collections, a temporal information system (TIS) would be appropri-
ate and very useful. It seems to us that the event structuring and narrative 
approach we have described here can be brought to these types of informa-
tion. Of course, the nature of the narratives and time scales of the events 
might be different. We have already started doing this in our studies of re-
search paper and proposal collections (Dou 2011).  
 
16  
Although work has been done that shows that data-driven, semi-automatic 
event discovery and narrative structuring can be developed for a variety of 
data (Luo 2010, Lu0 2006, Yu 2010), much work remains to be done. In 
particular, we must remember that the ultimate goal is to make events and 
narratives meaningful so that people can gather insights, develop actiona-
ble knowledge, and create powerful hypotheses and models. More work on 
automated processing to extract more meaningful results is needed. But we 
must keep in mind that the human is the final agent that reasons and at-
taches meaning. Thus improved interactive visualization techniques, espe-
cially ones that insert human intelligence at exactly the right points, are ab-
solutely necessary. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
This research is supported by DHS Center of Excellence - Natural Disas-
ters, Coastal Infrastructure and Emergency Management (DIEM), DOE 
DE-FG02-06ER25733, and NSF 0915528. 
  
17 
1.8. References 
Blei, D., Carin, L., and Dunson, D. (2010) ‘Probabilistic Topic Models,’ 
Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE , vol.27, no.6, pp. 55-65. 
Blei, D., Ng, A., and Jordan M. (2003) ‘Latent Dirichlet allocation,’ 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol.3, pp. 993–1022.  
Dou, W., Chang, R., Wang, X., and Ribarsky, W. (2011) ParallelTopics: A 
Probabilistic Approach to Exploring Document Collections. Accepted for 
publication, IEEE VAST. 
Griffin,L. (1993) ‘Narrative, Event-Structure Analysis, and Causal 
Interpretation in Historical Sociology,’ American Journal of Sociology, 
vol.98, pp. 1094-1133. 
Havre, S., Hetzler, B., and Nowell, L. (2000) ‘ThemeRiver: Visualizing 
Theme Changes over Time,’ Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information 
Visualization, pp. 115-123. 
IEEE VAST Challenge. [Online] Available at: 
http://hcil.cs.umd.edu/localphp/hcil/vast11 (Accessed: 1 September 2011). 
Jahn, M. (2005) Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative. English 
Department, University of Cologne. Version 1.8. [Online] Available at: 
http://www.uni-koeln.de/~ame02/pppn.htm (Accessed: 1 September 2011). 
Kohler, W. (1947) Gestalt Psychology. New York: Liveright. 
Luo, D., Yang, J., Krstajic, M.,  Fan, J., Ribarsky, W., and Keim, D. 
(2010) EventRiver: Interactive visual exploration of constantly evolving 
text collections. IEEE Trans. On Visualization and Computer Graphics, 
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.225 
Luo, H., Fan, J., Yang, J., and Ribarsky, W., and Sato, S. (2006) Exploring 
Large-Scale Video News via Interactive Visualization. IEEE VAST, pp. 
75-82. 
Mazurkiewicz, A. (1995) ‘Introduction to Trace Theory’, in Diekert, G. 
Rozenberg, (eds). The Book of Traces V. Singapore: World Scientific. pp. 
3-67. 
McCullagh, C. B. (1978) ‘Colligation and Classification in History.’ 
History and Theory. Vol.13. pp. 267-84. 
NAS (National Academy of Sciences) Workshop. New Research 
Directions for the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency (May, 2010, 
Washington, DC). 
18  
Øhrstrøm, P. and Hasle, P. (1995) Temporal logic: from ancient ideas to 
artificial intelligence. Springer. 
Pearl, J. (2002) ‘Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference.’ IIE 
Transactions, 34(6), pp. 583-589.  
Ribarsky, W., Sauda, E., Balmer, J., and Wartell, Z. (2012) The Whole 
Story: Building the Computer History of a Place. Accepted for publication, 
Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science (HICSS). 
Sudkamp, T., (1988) Languages and Machines: An Introduction to the 
Theory of Computer Science (3rd Edition). 
Wainer, G. (2009) Discrete-Event Modeling and Simulation A 
Practitioner's Approach. CRC Press. pp. 3–33. 
Yu, L., Lu, A., Ribarsky, W., and Chen., W. (2010) Digital Storytelling: 
Automatic Animation for Time-Varying Data Visualization. Computer 
Graphics Forum, Vol. 29 (7) pp. 2271-2280. 
Zaniolo, C., Ceri S., Faloutsos C., Snodgrass R.T., Subrahmanian, V.S., 
Zicari, R. Advanced Database Systems (The Morgan Kaufmann Series in 
Data Management Systems), 1997.  

