Predictive Analytics Using a Blackboard-based Reasoning Agent 
 
Jia Yue
1
, Anita Raja
1
, William Ribarsky
2
 
1
Department of Software and Information Systems 
2
Department of Computer Science 
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte 
{jyue,anraja,ribarsky}@uncc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Significant increase in collected data for investigative 
tasks and the increased complexity of the reasoning 
process itself have made investigative analytical tasks 
more challenging.  These tasks are time critical and 
typically involve identifying and tracking multiple 
hypotheses; gathering evidence to validate the correct 
hypotheses and eliminating the incorrect ones. In this 
paper we specifically address predictive tasks that are 
concerned with predicting future trends. We describe 
RESIN, an AI blackboard-based agent that leverages 
interactive visualizations and mixed-initiative problem 
solving to enable analysts to explore and pre-process large 
amounts of data in order to perform predictive analytics. 
Our empirical evaluation discusses the advantages and 
challenges of predictive analytics in a complex domain like 
intelligence analysis. 
 
1. Introduction 
  
Consider the scenario where an intelligence analyst is 
informed that a terrorism event occurred several minutes 
ago. The analyst is provided with partial and sometimes 
conflicting information about the incident including the 
incident location, the occurrence time, the attack weapon, 
and the number of human casualities reported in the 
various news media. The analyst has to determine the 
terrorist group/organization behind the incident, which is a 
critical piece of information related to the entire attack. 
Once the name of the terrorist group/organization has been 
identified, the activity trend of the group is determined so 
that appropriate security and response measures can be 
taken. Data on past terrorism events is used to uncover the 
group’s terrorist activities by year and region. This will 
provide the analyst with a high-level picture of the activity 
for this group. For example, a certain group A may have 
the activity pattern of launching a major attack and then 
not being active for the next six months. On the other hand, 
a rival group B, which is also active in the region, could 
have the activity pattern of initiating several small 
transportation related attacks simultaneously or in spurts 
over a period of 2 or 3 days. Based on the characteristics of 
the current event and past activity patterns, the analyst can 
determine the trend of the future events and suggest 
appropriate precautionary measures. 
    Pirolli and Card [8] describe a model of cognitive task 
analysis performed by analysts that consists of two 
overlapping loops. The first of the two loops is the 
foraging loop that includes searching for information by 
accessing external data sources; reading and extracting the 
data; and searching and filtering evidence to support the 
second loop called the sensemaking loop. Sensemaking 
involves hypothesis generation and validation and uses the 
evidence generated by the foraging loop to support its 
search process. 
In this work, we are interested in building an automated 
mixed-initiative agent called RESIN (RESource bounded 
INformation gathering) [6] to assist analysts in their 
decision-making. This agent will help determine 
predictions of immediate and near-term events based on 
past events by seamlessly integrating visualizations and 
predictive analytics to support the foraging and 
sensemaking loops. Predictive analytics is concerned with 
the prediction of probabilities of future events and trends 
based on observed events. It encompasses a multi-
perspective approach that includes integrated reasoning, 
information visualization, pattern recognition and 
predictive modeling associated with domain knowledge. 
Recent progress in information visualization   integrates 
new computational and theory-based tools with innovative 
interactive techniques and visual representations to enable 
richer access to data. 
RESIN extends our previous work on TIBOR [1], a 
foraging agent capable of making time-bounded decisions. 
It combines both foraging and sensemaking loops by 
emphasizing the blackboard reasoning and mixed-initiative 
reasoning aspects in order to assist investigative analysts in 
performing visualization-based predictive analytics. It  also 
leverages sequential decision making [2] to determine the 
sources for foraging analysis and the AI blackboard system 
[3] to support hypothesis tracking and validation 
(sensemaking loop) in a highly uncertain environment. 
Providing a clear explanation in support of such a decision 
making process is critical, since it is the key to gain and 
maintain the analyst’s trust in the system.   Moreover, 
RESIN provides ways for the user to interact with and 
control the problem-solving process at all critical decision 
points defined by the expert. In summary, RESIN provides 
investigative analysts with the capability to forecast real 
data; provide access to automated support for their 
decision-making; find non-myopic alternate solution paths; 
to investigate outliers in the data.  One assumption we have 
made in this work based on our discussions with 
intelligence analysts is that past information about terrorist 
attacks can be useful to forecast/understand future ones. 
 
2.  Predictive Analytics in RESIN 
The hypothesis we plan to validate in this paper is: 
Given a current event, it is possible to predict future events 
by first determining the missing information about the 
current event and then determining the event trends based 
on the historical events captured in the global terrorism 
database.  
 
    The Global Terrorism Database (GTD) [5] is an open-
source database containing information on both domestic 
and international terrorists from 1970 through 1997 (with 
recent update to 2007). The GTD tool [9] is a visual 
analytics approach that provides a comprehensible 
presentation of this massive geopolitical event database. 
With its four highly coordinated  views (corresponding to 
Who, What, When, Where), this tool will visually provide 
investigators knowledge about terrorist activities and their 
relationships and try to guide them to understand why 
those activities happened through user interactions. We 
employed the Box-Jenkins [10] procedure, a widely used 
and efficient forecasting technique, especially for time 
series, for the analysis of terrorist events from the GTD. 
    In Figure 1, the MapView shows related incidents 
Hezbollah. The user can use this view to compare group 
activities and determine for instance that despite sharing 
similar geo-spatial distributions, these two groups are quite 
with respect to radius and ranges, suggesting unique 
terrorist activities.  Similarly a TemporalView reveals the 
active times for Hezbollah (1979-1993) and their main 
attack types. (The colors in the temporal views are keyed 
to different attack types) The information from these two 
views will provide the human user with clues to estimate 
their confidence values and to adjust the predicted results. 
RESIN’s problem solving process is initiated when the 
human user identifies a goal that is posted on the 
blackboard, and this action triggers the RESIN agent.    
Given a particular deadline for the problem solving 
process, RESIN will assist the analyst in predicting future 
events by incrementally identifying the group perpetrating 
the current event and the behavior patterns of that group so 
that necessary steps can be taken to prevent casualities and 
major damage in any possible near-future incidents.  
 
TYPE: Assassination 
WEAPON: Explosives 
ENTITY: Political Party 
YEAR: 1992 
REGION: Middle East/North Africa 
NKILL: 2 
GNAME: ? 
 
 
 
 RESIN’s input tuple contains partial information about a 
single current terrorist incident (see example in Figure 2) 
and a deadline to solve the problem. 
 The input event has six known categories: TYPE, 
WEAPON, ENTITY, YEAR, REGION, and NKILL as 
initial inputs. Each category has a different number of 
possible values, for example, TYPE (e.g. assassination, 
bombing, facility attack) contains different types of 
attacking methods, while ENTITY represents different 
attack targets, such as ‘Political Party’, ‘US 
Police/Military’ and so on.  
 We have identified two phases in the sensemaking loop 
for the intelligence analysis domain. 
Phase1: Category Prediction (CP): Predict the missing 
group name (GNAME) and associated confidence value of 
a partially defined current event.   
Phase2: Event Count Prediction (ECP): Predict 
number of events (ENUM) possibly perpetrated by the 
group identified in Phase1 and confidence value by 
applying time series analysis on historical data. 
 The details of each of the phases are described below:  
Phase1: CP 
[Input]: Input event and all incident data from the GTD 
1: Input event posted on the blackboard. 
2: TÆMS task structure [4] modeler generates appropriate task 
structure and translates it to an MDP. The MDP is solved by the 
MDP solver and suggests C4.5 as the first KS to be used.  
3: C4.5 uses the GTD data set and the input tuple as input and 
generates an initial prediction of GNAME.  
4: User verifies the predicted result using GTD tool. 
5: The final solution of the predicted group name with a 
confidence value posted on the blackboard. 
[Output]: Predicted GNAME with confidence value is posted 
on blackboard  
Phase2: ECP 
[Input]: Input event, Prediction time period, GNAME with 
confidence value, all incident data from the GTD 
1: Manually identify if the data is time series data using log 
transformation of the initial data variables and a unit root 
test.  
2:  Choose appropriate Box-Jenkins method model.   
Figure 2.  Partial Terrorist Incident Description 
Figure 1. MapView (Left) and Temporal View 
(Right) for group Hezbollah 
 
3: Predict ENUM using Box-Jenkins method for given 
Prediction time period. 
[Output]: ENUM with confidence value for given year. 
 
 
3. Experiments 
 
We now describe experiments to predict events and 
their types following the given input incident by employing 
time series analysis. Here, we employ the Box-Jenkins [7, 
10] procedure, a widely used and most efficient forecasting 
technique, especially for time series, for the analysis of 
terrorist events in the GTD [5]. We carry out the time 
series analysis for the prediction from two perspectives: 
one is the perspective of all available data; the other is 
focused on the data in a certain region or carried out by a 
particular terrorism group. 
    All terrorist events grouped by month of number of 
events (data in 1993 is unavailable in the GTD) were used 
for this analysis. There are 324 months’ data in the GTD 
from January 1970 to December 1997 and we employed 
the first 312 months’ data as the training set to create the 
model while the last 12 months’ data as the testing set for 
the purpose of comparison with the predicted values. That 
means 12 data points needed to be predicted by the model 
created by 312 data points. With the log transformation of 
the initial data variables and a unit root test, we obtained 
the series which satisfy prerequisites of the Box-Jenkins 
method that requires the time series to be stationary with 
constant mean value. With the comparison of the optional 
models based on three pivotal main parameters-Adjusted 
R-squared (the coefficient of determination), Akaike 
Information Criterion (AIC) and Hannan-Quinn criterion 
,we determined AR (3) to be the best model for the GTD 
data series with a Mean Absolute Percent Error (MAPE) 
index of 15.51916 for static prediction. 
    Figure 4 indicates the close fit between the predicted 
number of terrorist events and the actual number of 
occurrences for the year 1997. In fact, most of the 12 
actual values are within the 95 percent confidence interval 
of the predicted values.  Compared with GTD’s complete 
data as shown in Figure 5, our forecasting is on par with 
the actual curve which suggests that the approach we used 
here for the prediction with the overall GTD is feasible.  
    We now define Region data as terrorism event incidents 
in the past for a particular region while Group data is the 
set of incident perpetrated by a group.  In the GTD, there 
are six regions and the worldwide attacks are carried out by 
2404 terrorist groups. The stationary series for Region and 
Group were obtained by the transformation of one-order 
differencing to the initial data.  The correlogram analysis 
indicates that these series are distributed randomly within 
the confidence interval, which indicates that they are 
purely stochastic series that cannot fit into AR, MA, and 
ARMA models [10]. One general method for predicting a 
random time series is to acquire the mean of its stationary 
status and the predicted value can be obtained by the 
converse transformation of differencing [10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
     
  
    Table 1 describes the results of the forecasting process 
on the Region data. There are only 27 years of GTD data 
available due to the missing data in 1993. It is observed 
that the large standard deviation (Std Dev) for each Region 
indicates that the predicted value deviates significantly 
from the actual value. This is valid since the Region data is 
quite sparse. Since there are more data points available at 
the Group level, the observed standard deviations shown in 
Table 2 are much lower than the Region data. The 
predicted values are in the same order of magnitude as the 
actual values. This is encouraging given that our data was 
sparse. Since our goal in this paper is to identify the 
appropriate approach for predictive analytics in this 
domain, we contend that more accurate data would 
improve our performance. It should also be noted that our 
approach the predicted value is very dependent on the 
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
n
u
m
b
er
  o
f 
 o
cc
u
rr
en
ce
s
Month
Actual Forecast 95 percent confidence interval
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1 32 60 91 121 152 182 213 244 274 305
n
u
m
b
er
  o
f 
 o
cc
u
rr
en
ce
s
Month
Actual Forecast
Figure 4. Actual and predicted number of 
events per month from 1997.1 to 1997.12 
 
Figure 5. Actual numbers of events from month 
1th to 324th with comparison of predicted ones 
from month 313th to 324th 
 
Figure 3.  RESIN’s 2-phase Predictive Analytics     
previous value. This implies that the approach is most 
effective in domains that require short-term forecasting, 
such as terrorist event predictions.  
 
 
 
REGION Mean  Std Dev Predicted 
Time 
Predicted 
Value 
Actual 
Value 
North  
America 
-2.00   31.38 1997 17 31 
Europe 20.34 159.88 1997 755.34 514 
Middle 
East/ 
North 
Africa 
13.88 
 
227.56 
 
1997 
 
194.88 
 
554 
 
 
 
GROUP Mean  Std 
Dev 
Predicted 
Time 
Predicted 
Value 
Actual 
Value 
Fatah 0.015  1.68 1992.Q1 1.01 1 
Hezbollah 0.05 3.89 1997.Q1 2.05 4 
ETA 0.058 11.50 1997.Q1 0 10 
IRA -0.01 13.64 1997.Q1 3.98 7 
    
4. Discussion and Future Work 
 
    Most of the studies on global terrorism mainly focus on 
the descriptive analysis of past trends and the exploration 
of the various causes of terrorism.  The predictive analytics 
on the Global Terrorism Database involves the 
identification of global patterns and trends as well as high-
level strategic reasoning.  The RESIN system combines 
classification techniques, blackboard-based reasoning and 
the GTD visualization tool to perform the prediction for 
unknown event information and the future trends. The goal 
of the empirical study in the previous section is to verify 
whether our approach is on the right track and how well it 
performs in a real-world application. A huge challenge in 
intelligence analysis is the uncertainty (missing and 
contradictory) information about the incidents. So the 
quality of our results is not as high as it would be in a 
simulated domain.  However, the results do support the 
hypothesis that the combination of methods in RESIN will 
potentially assist in predictive analytics.  
In that sense, RESIN is a good start. There are some 
interesting areas that we would like to investigate in the 
future.  We intend to integrate the AI blackboard with a 
variety of other knowledge sources, including a 
sensemaking knowledge source that uses case-based 
reasoning and pattern recognition; as well as other 
multimedia visualization tools such as the semantic video 
browser. We plan to extend RESIN’s functionality so that 
it will facilitate an analyst’s problem solving process by 
determining predictions about an event from multiple and 
conflicting viewpoints from different stake holders. We 
want to combine information from multiple sources and 
using multiple predictive methods to perform the 
forecasting.  
 
5. Acknowledgement 
    This work was sponsored by the National Visualization 
and Analytics Center (NVAC) under the auspices of the 
Southeastern Regional Visualization and Analytics Center. 
NVAC is a U.S. Department of Homeland Security 
Program led by Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. 
We thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. 
 
References 
 
[1] Liu,  D., Raja, A.,  and  Vaidyanath, J.,  TIBOR: A Resource-
bounded Information Foraging Agent for Visual Analytics, 
Proceedings of 2007 IEEE/ WIC/ ACM International Conference 
on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT 2007), Silicon Valley, CA, 
November  2007, pp. 349-355. 
 
[2] Bertesekas, D. and Tsitsiklis, J., Neuro-Dynamic 
Programming, Athena scientific, Belmont, MA, 2006. 
 
[3] Corkill, D., Blackboard Systems AI Expert, 1991, 6(9):pp 40-
47. 
 
[4] Decker, K. and Lesser, V., Quantitative modeling of complex 
environments, International Journal of Intelligent Systems in 
Accounting, Finance, and Management, December 1993, 2(4): 
pp.215-234. 
 
[5] LaFree, G. and Dugan, L., Global Terrorism Database, 1970 
– 1997. ICPSR04586-v1, College Park, MD: University of 
Maryland, 2006. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for 
Political and Social Research [distributor], Apl, 2007. 
 
[6] Liu,  D., Yue, J., Wang,X.,  Raja, A., Ribarsky, W., The Role 
of Blackboard-based Reasoning and Visual Analytics in RESIN'S 
Predictive Analysis, Proceedings of 2008 IEEE/ WIC/ ACM 
International Conference on Intelligent Agent Technology (IAT 
2008),  Sydney, Dec 9-12, 2008.  
 
[7] Brockwell, P., and Davis, R., Time series theory and methods, 
published by Springer, 1991. 
 
[8] Pirolli, P., and Card, S., The Sensemaking Process and 
Leverage Points for Analyst Technology as Identified Through 
Cognitive Task Analysis, Proceedings of 2005 International 
Conference on Intelligence Analysis, 2005.  
 
[9] Wang, X., Miller, E., Smarick, K., Ribarsky, W., and Chang, 
R., Investigative Visual Analysis of Global Terrorism, Journal of 
Computer Graphics Forum, Eurovis, 2008. 
 
[10] Oppenheim, R.,Forecasting via the Box-Jenkins Method, 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol.6, No.3, June 
1978, pp 206-221 
Table1. Numbers of terrorist events for Region Data 
 
 Table2. Numbers of terrorist events for Group Data 
 

